AUDITD-PLUGINS(5)        System Administration Utilities       AUDITD-PLUGINS(5)

NAME
     auditd-plugins - realtime event receivers

DESCRIPTION
     auditd  can  multiplex  audit events in realtime. It takes audit events and
     distributes them to child programs that want to analyze events in realtime.
     When the audit daemon receives a SIGTERM or SIGHUP, it passes  that  signal
     to its child processes so that can reload the configuration or terminate.

     The  child  programs  install  a  configuration file in a plugins directory
     which defaults to /etc/audit/plugins.d. This can be  controlled  by  a  au-
     ditd.conf  config  option  plugin_dir if the admin wished to locate plugins
     somewhere else. But auditd will install its plugins in  the  default  loca-
     tion.

     The  plugin  directory will be scanned and every plugin that is active will
     be started. If the plugin has a problem and exits, it  will  be  started  a
     maximum of max_restarts times as found in auditd.conf.

     Configuration  files  must  be  regular  files that do not begin with a '.'
     character, contain at most one '.' character, and have  a  '.conf'  suffix.
     Files  that do not meet these criteria will be skipped. Config file options
     are given one per line with an equal  sign  between  the  keyword  and  its
     value. The available options are as follows:


     active
            The options for this are yes or no.

     path   This  is  the absolute path to the plugin executable. In the case of
            internal plugins, it would be the name of the plugin.

     type   This tells the dispatcher how the plugin wants to be run.  There  is
            only  one  valid option, always , which means the plugin is external
            and should always be run. The default is always since there  are  no
            more builtin plugins.

     args   This  allows  you  to pass arguments to the child program. Generally
            plugins do not take arguments and have their own  config  file  that
            instructs  them  how they should be configured. At the moment, there
            is a limit of 2 args.

     format
            The valid options for this are binary and string.  Binary passes the
            data exactly as the audit event dispatcher gets it  from  the  audit
            daemon.  The string option tells the dispatcher to completely change
            the event into a string suitable for parsing with the audit  parsing
            library. The default value is string.


NOTE
     auditd  has  an internal queue to hold events for plugins. (See the q_depth
     setting in auditd.conf.) Plugins have to watch for and  dequeue  events  as
     fast  as  possible  and  queue them internally if they can't be immediately
     processed. If the plugin is not able to dequeue records, the auditd  inter-
     nal  queue will get filled. At any time, as root, you can run the following
     to check auditd's metrics:

     auditctl --signal cont ; sleep 1 ; cat /run/audit/auditd.state

     Plugins using libauplugin can retrieve their own queue metrics with  auplu-
     gin_queue_depth,   auplugin_queue_max_depth,  and  auplugin_queue_overflow.
     The auplugin_register_stats_callback function allows reporting these values
     from a signal handler.

     If auditd's internal queue fills, it cannot dequeue  any  events  from  the
     kernel  backlog.  If  the  kernel's backlog fills, it looks at the value of
     backlog_wait_time to delay all processes that generate an event to  see  if
     there  is  eventually room to add the event. This will likely be noticed as
     slowing down various processes on the machine. The kernel's audit subsystem
     can be checked by running:

     auditctl -s

     When tuning the audit system's performance, you'd want to check both kernel
     and auditd metrics and adjust accordingly.


NOTES FOR DEVELOPERS
     When the audit daemon starts your plugin, you will be running as  root.  If
     you do not need root privileges, you should change uid/gid to lower chances
     of  being  a  target for exploit. If you need to retain capabilities, using
     libcap-ng is the simplest way.

     Your environment is not going to be clean. You are inheriting many  attrib-
     utes  from  auditd itself. You will need to adjust your signal mask, sigac-
     tion, umask, and environmental variables. Look at the auditd  man  page  to
     see  which  signals auditd used. Plugins are expected to handle SIGTERM and
     SIGHUP. You will also inherit the resource limits of auditd. Note that some
     of these resource limits, such as maximum number of open  descriptors,  are
     controlled by systemd. You also inherit auditd's nice value. You might want
     to adjust that to be sure to keep up with incoming audit events.

     Auditd will send events to the plugin on it's stdin. The plugin has to keep
     this  descriptor  empty so that events don't back up. If you do significant
     processing of each event, you should add an internal queue to  your  design
     in order to keep events flowing. The auparse_feed function is the preferred
     way  to  examine  whole  events  if you need to analyze the contents of the
     events.


FILES
     /etc/auditd/auditd.conf /etc/audit/plugins.d

SEE ALSO
     auditd.conf(5), auditd(8), execve(2), auparse_feed(3).

AUTHOR
     Steve Grubb

Red Hat                             Jan 2024                   AUDITD-PLUGINS(5)
