GITMODULES(5)                      Git Manual                      GITMODULES(5)

NAME
     gitmodules - Defining submodule properties

SYNOPSIS
     $GIT_WORK_TREE/.gitmodules

DESCRIPTION
     The  .gitmodules  file, located in the top-level directory of a Git working
     tree, is a text file with a syntax matching the  requirements  of  git-con-
     fig(1).

     The file contains one subsection per submodule, and the subsection value is
     the  name of the submodule. The name is set to the path where the submodule
     has been added unless it was customized with the --name option of git  sub-
     module  add.  Each  submodule  section also contains the following required
     keys:

     submodule.<name>.path
         Defines the path, relative to the top-level directory of the Git  work-
         ing  tree,  where the submodule is expected to be checked out. The path
         name must not end with a /. All submodule paths must be  unique  within
         the .gitmodules file.

     submodule.<name>.url
         Defines  a  URL from which the submodule repository can be cloned. This
         may be either an absolute URL ready to be passed to git-clone(1) or (if
         it begins with ./ or ../) a location  relative  to  the  superproject's
         origin repository.

     In addition, there are a number of optional keys:

     submodule.<name>.update
         Defines  the default update procedure for the named submodule, i.e. how
         the submodule is updated by the git submodule update command in the su-
         perproject. This is only used by git submodule init to  initialize  the
         configuration variable of the same name. Allowed values here are check-
         out,  rebase,  merge  or none, but not !command (for security reasons).
         See the description of the update command in git-submodule(1) for  more
         details.

     submodule.<name>.branch
         A remote branch name for tracking updates in the upstream submodule. If
         the  option is not specified, it defaults to the remote HEAD. A special
         value of . is used to indicate that the name of the branch in the  sub-
         module  should  be  the  same name as the current branch in the current
         repository. See the --remote documentation in git-submodule(1) for  de-
         tails.

     submodule.<name>.fetchRecurseSubmodules
         This  option  can be used to control recursive fetching of this submod-
         ule. If this option  is  also  present  in  the  submodule's  entry  in
         .git/config  of  the  superproject, the setting there will override the
         one found in .gitmodules. Both settings can be overridden on  the  com-
         mand  line  by  using the --[no-]recurse-submodules option to git fetch
         and git pull.

     submodule.<name>.ignore
         Defines under what circumstances git status and the diff family show  a
         submodule as modified. The following values are supported:

         all
             The  submodule will never be considered modified (but will nonethe-
             less show up in the output of status and commit when  it  has  been
             staged).  Adding  a  submodule with (new commits) can be overridden
             using git add --force <submodule.path>. This setting  affects  sta-
             tus, update-index, diff and log (due to underlying diff).

         dirty
             All changes to the submodule's work tree will be ignored, only com-
             mitted  differences  between  the  HEAD  of  the  submodule and its
             recorded state in the superproject are taken into account.

         untracked
             Only untracked files in submodules will be ignored. Committed  dif-
             ferences and modifications to tracked files will show up.

         none
             No  modifications  to submodules are ignored, all of committed dif-
             ferences, and modifications to  tracked  and  untracked  files  are
             shown. This is the default option.

         If  this option is also present in the submodule's entry in .git/config
         of the superproject, the setting there will override the one  found  in
         .gitmodules.

         Both  settings can be overridden on the command line by using the --ig-
         nore-submodules option. The git submodule commands are not affected  by
         this setting.

     submodule.<name>.shallow
         When  set  to  true,  a  clone of this submodule will be performed as a
         shallow clone (with a history depth of 1) unless  the  user  explicitly
         asks for a non-shallow clone.

NOTES
     Git  does not allow the .gitmodules file within a working tree to be a sym-
     bolic link, and will refuse to check out such a tree entry. This keeps  be-
     havior consistent when the file is accessed from the index or a tree versus
     from  the filesystem, and helps Git reliably enforce security checks of the
     file contents.

EXAMPLES
     Consider the following .gitmodules file:

         [submodule "libfoo"]
                 path = include/foo
                 url = git://foo.com/git/lib.git

         [submodule "libbar"]
                 path = include/bar
                 url = git://bar.com/git/lib.git


     This defines two submodules, libfoo and libbar. These are  expected  to  be
     checked  out in the paths include/foo and include/bar, and for both submod-
     ules a URL is specified which can be used for cloning the submodules.

SEE ALSO
     git-submodule(1), gitsubmodules(7), git-config(1)

GIT
     Part of the git(1) suite

Git 2.54.0                         2026-04-19                      GITMODULES(5)
