groff_tmac(5)                  File Formats Manual                 groff_tmac(5)

Name
     groff_tmac - macro files in the GNU roff typesetting system

Description
     Definitions of macros, strings, and registers for use in a roff(7) document
     can  be collected into macro files, roff input files designed to produce no
     output themselves but instead ease the preparation of other roff documents.
     There is no syntactical difference between a macro file and any other  roff
     document;  only  its  purpose  distinguishes  it.  When a macro file is in-
     stalled at a standard location, named according to  a  certain  convention,
     and  suitable  for use by a general audience, it is termed a macro package.
     The "tmac" name originated in early Unix  culture  as  an  abbreviation  of
     "troff macros".

     Macro  packages  can  be loaded by supplying the -m option to troff(1) or a
     groff front end.  A macro file's name must  have  the  form  name.tmac  (or
     tmac.name)  and be placed in a "tmac directory" to be loadable with the "-m
     name" option.  Section "Environment" of troff(1) lists  these  directories.
     Alternatively, a groff document requiring a macro file can load it with the
     mso ("macro source") request.

     Macro  files  are  named for their most noteworthy application, but a macro
     file need not define any macros.  It can restrict itself to defining regis-
     ters and strings or invoking other groff requests.  It can even be empty.

     Encode macro files in ISO 646:1991 IRV (US-ASCII) or ISO Latin-1  (8859-1).
     To  prepare  for  a  future  groff release supporting UTF-8 input, restrict
     files to ISO 646 codes.  soelim(1) by design does  not  interpret  mso  re-
     quests,  and  the  encodings  used  by documents employing a macro file can
     vary.

Macro packages
     Some macro packages ("major" or "full-service") assume  responsibility  for
     page layout and other critical functions; others ("supplemental" or "auxil-
     iary")  do  not.  GNU roff provides most major macro packages found in AT&T
     and BSD Unix systems, an additional full-service package, and many  supple-
     mental  packages.   Multiple  full-service macro packages cannot be used by
     the same document.  Auxiliary packages can, in general, be freely combined,
     though attention to their use of the groff language name spaces for identi-
     fiers (particularly registers, macros, strings, and diversions)  should  be
     paid.   Name space management challenged AT&T troff users; GNU troff's sup-
     port for arbitrarily long identifiers affords few excuses for  name  colli-
     sions,  apart from attempts at compatibility with the demands of historical
     documents.

   Man pages
     Two full-service macro packages are specialized for formatting Unix  refer-
     ence  manuals;  they  do  not  support  features like footnotes or multiple
     columnation.

     an       constructs man pages in a format  introduced  by  Seventh  Edition
              Unix (1979).  Its macro interface is small, and the package widely
              used; see groff_man(7).

     doc      constructs man pages in a format introduced by 4.3BSD-Reno (1990).
              It  provides  many more features than an, but is also larger, more
              complex, and not as widely adopted; see groff_mdoc(7).

     Because readers of man pages often do not know in advance which macros  are
     used to format a given document, a wrapper is available.

     andoc    recognizes a document's use of an or doc and loads the correspond-
              ing  macro  package.  Multiple man pages, in either format, can be
              handled; andoc reloads each macro package as necessary.

   General full-service packages
     The following packages each support composition of documents of  any  kind,
     from  single-page  memos  to lengthy monographs.  They are similar in func-
     tionality; select one that suits your taste.

     me     originates in 2BSD (1978); see groff_me(7).

     mm     originates in Programmer's Workbench  (PWB)  Unix  1.0  (1977);  see
            groff_mm(7).

     mom    was  contributed to groff in 2002, and freely exercises its many ex-
            tended features.  See groff_mom(7).

     ms     originates in Sixth Edition Unix (1975); see groff_ms(7).

   Localization packages
     For Western languages, an auxiliary package for localization sets  the  hy-
     phenation mode and loads hyphenation patterns and exceptions.  Localization
     files  can  also adjust the date format and provide translations of strings
     used by some of the full-service macro packages; alter the  input  encoding
     (see  the  next  section); and change the amount of supplemental inter-sen-
     tence space.  For Eastern languages, the localization file defines  charac-
     ter  classes  and sets flags on them.  By default, troffrc loads the local-
     ization file for English.

     trans  loads localized strings used by various macro packages  after  their
            localized forms have been prepared by a localization macro file.

     groff provides the following localization files.

     cs     Czech;  localizes man, me, mm, mom, and ms.  Sets the input encoding
            to Latin-2 by loading latin2.tmac.

     de
     den    German; localizes man, me, mm, mom, and ms.  Sets the input encoding
            to Latin-1 by loading latin1.tmac.

            de.tmac selects hyphenation patterns  for  traditional  orthography,
            and  den.tmac  does the same for the new orthography ("Rechtschreib-
            reform").

     en     English.  Sets the input encoding to Latin-1 by loading latin1.tmac.

     es     Spanish; localizes man, me, mm, mom, and ms.  Sets the input  encod-
            ing to Latin-9 by loading latin9.tmac.

     fr     French; localizes man, me, mm, mom, and ms.  Sets the input encoding
            to Latin-9 by loading latin9.tmac.

     it     Italian;  localizes man, me, mm, mom, and ms.  Sets the input encod-
            ing to Latin-1 by loading latin1.tmac.

     ja     Japanese.

     pl     Polish; localizes man, me, mm, mom, and ms.  Sets the input encoding
            to Latin-2 by loading latin2.tmac.

     ru     Russian; localizes man, me, mm, mom, and ms.  Sets the input  encod-
            ing to KOI8-R by loading koi8-r.tmac.

     sv     Swedish;  localizes man, me, mm, mom, and ms.  Sets the input encod-
            ing to Latin-1 by loading latin1.tmac.  Some of the localization  of
            the mm package is handled separately; see groff_mmse(7).

     zh     Chinese.

   Input encodings
     Localization  influences  automatic hyphenation in two distinct but related
     respects.  A macro file specific to a  character  coding  identifies  which
     character  codes  correspond  to letters expected in the language's hyphen-
     ation pattern files and sets up case equivalences  for  those  letters.   A
     language's  macro  file determines which of these letters are equivalent to
     other letters for hyphenation purposes.

     For example, in  English,  the  letter  "~n"  occurs  in  loan  words.   The
     latin1.tmac  and  latin9.tmac macro files define a hyphenation code for "~n"
     and make "~N" equivalent to it.  The English localization file en.tmac  fur-
     thermore  makes  "~n" equivalent to "n".  In Spanish (es.tmac), however, "~n"
     and "n" are not equivalent.  The language localization file loads an appro-
     priate encoding localization file; a document need not do so directly.

     latin1
     latin2
     latin5
     latin9  support the ISO Latin-1, Latin-2, Latin-5,  and  Latin-9  encodings
             (8859-1, 8859-2, 8859-9, and 8859-15, respectively).

     koi8-r  supports  the  KOI8-R  encoding.   KOI8-R  code points in the range
             0x80-0x9F are not valid input to GNU troff;  see  section  "Identi-
             fiers" in groff(7).  This should be no impediment to practical doc-
             uments, as these KOI8-R code points do not encode letters, but box-
             drawing symbols and characters that are better obtained via special
             character escape sequences; see groff_char(7).

   General auxiliary packages
     The  macro  packages  in this section are not intended for stand-alone use,
     but can add functionality to any other macro package or  to  plain  ("raw")
     groff documents.

     62bit      provides  macros  for  addition, multiplication, and division of
                62-bit integers (allowing safe multiplication of  signed  31-bit
                integers, for example).

     hdtbl      allows  the  generation  of tables using a syntax similar to the
                HTML table model.  This Heidelberger table macro package is  not
                a preprocessor, which can be useful if the contents of table en-
                tries  are  determined  by macro calls or string interpolations.
                Compare to tbl(1).  It works only with the ps and pdf output de-
                vices.  See groff_hdtbl(7).

     papersize  enables the paper format to be set on the command line with  the
                "-d  paper=fmt" option to troff.  Valid fmts are the ISO and DIN
                formats "A0-A6", "B0-B6", "C0-C6", and "D0-D6"; the U.S. formats
                "letter",  "legal",  "tabloid",   "ledger",   "statement",   and
                "executive";  and  the  envelope formats "com10", "monarch", and
                "DL".  All formats, even those for envelopes,  are  in  portrait
                orientation:  the longer measurement is vertical.  Appending "l"
                (ell) to any of these  denotes  landscape  orientation  instead.
                This  macro  file  assumes one-inch horizontal margins, and sets
                registers recognized by the groff man, mdoc,  mm,  mom,  and  ms
                packages  to  configure them accordingly.  If you want different
                margins, you will need to use  those  packages'  facilities,  or
                troff  ll  and/or po requests, to adjust them.  An output device
                typically requires command-line options -p and  -l  to  override
                the  paper  dimensions and orientation, respectively, defined in
                its DESC file; see subsection "Paper format" of groff(1).   This
                macro  file  is  normally  loaded at startup by the troffrc file
                when formatting for a typesetter (but not a terminal).

     pdfpic     provides a single macro, PDFPIC, that operates in two modes.  If
                it is not used with gropdf, the given file must be a PDF; PDFPIC
                then relies on the external program pdftops(1)  to  convert  the
                PDF to an encapsulated PostScript (EPS) file and calls the PSPIC
                macro  with which it shares an interface.  If output is to a PDF
                document, PDFPIC uses the "pdf: pdfpic" device extension command
                (see gropdf(1)); the given file can then be a PDF or any graphic
                file format supported by gropdf.

                Since PDFPIC needs to discover the width and height of the image
                (to check if sufficient room exists to place it on the page), it
                has dependencies on external programs as shown below.

                allbox   center;    Cb    Ci    Ci    Ci    Li    C     C     C.
                     pdfinfo(1)     file(1)   identify(1)       .pdf /    /    /
                .jpg X    /    / .jp2 X    X    / other     X    X    /

                To include image formats such as PNG, PAM, and GIF,  gropdf  re-
                lies upon PerlMagick modules to embed the graphic.  They are not
                needed for the types listed in the table above.

                If the required programs are not available, file is treated as a
                PDF; failure is likely if it is not one.

     pic        supplies definitions of the macros PS, PE, PF, and PY, used with
                the  pic(1)  preprocessor.  They center each picture.  Use it if
                your document does not use a full-service macro package, or that
                package does not supply working pic macro  definitions.   Except
                for  man  and mdoc, those provided with groff already do so (ex-
                ception: mm employs the name PF for a different purpose).

     pspic      provides a macro, PSPIC, that includes a PostScript graphic in a
                document.  The ps, dvi, html, and xhtml output  devices  support
                such  inclusions;  for  all other drivers, the image is replaced
                with a rectangular border  of  the  same  size.   pspic.tmac  is
                loaded at startup by the troffrc file.

                Its syntax is as follows.

                       .PSPIC [-L|-R|-C|-I n] file [width [height]]

                file  is  the name of the PostScript file; width and height give
                the desired width and height of the image.  If neither  a  width
                nor  a  height  argument is specified, the image's natural width
                (as given in the file's bounding box) or the current line length
                is used as the width, whatever is smaller.  The width and height
                arguments may have scaling units attached; the  default  scaling
                unit is i.  PSPIC scales the graphic uniformly in the horizontal
                and  vertical  directions  so that it is no more than width wide
                and height high.  Option -C centers  the  graphic  horizontally;
                this  is  the  default.   -L  and  -R  left- and right-align the
                graphic, respectively.  -I indents the graphic by n (with a  de-
                fault scaling unit of m).

                To  use PSPIC within a diversion, we recommend extending it with
                the following code, assuring that  the  diversion's  width  com-
                pletely covers the image's width.

                       .am PSPIC
                       .  vpt 0
                       \h'(\\n[ps-offset]u + \\n[ps-deswid]u)'
                       .  sp -1
                       .  vpt 1
                       ..

                Failure  to  load  PSPIC's image argument is not an error.  (The
                psbb request does issue an error diagnostic.)  To  make  such  a
                failure fatal, append to the pspic*error-hook macro.

                       .am pspic*error-hook
                       .  ab
                       ..

     ptx        provides  a  macro, xx, to format permuted index entries as pro-
                duced by the GNU ptx(1) program.  If your formatting needs  dif-
                fer, copy the macro into your document and adapt it.

     rfc1345    defines  special  character escape sequences named for the glyph
                mnemonics specified in RFC 1345 and the digraph table of the Vim
                text editor.  See groff_rfc1345(7).

     sboxes     offers an interface to the "pdf:  background"  device  extension
                command  supported  by  gropdf(1).  Using this package, groff ms
                documents can draw colored rectangles beneath any output.

                .BOXSTART SHADED color OUTLINED color INDENT size WEIGHT size
                       begins a box, where the argument after SHADED  gives  the
                       fill  color  and  that  after  OUTLINED the border color.
                       Omit the former to get a borderless filled  box  and  the
                       latter  for  a border with no fill.  The specified WEIGHT
                       is used if the box is OUTLINED.

                       INDENT precedes a value that leaves  a  gap  between  the
                       border and the contents inside the box.

                       Each  color  must be a defined groff color name, and each
                       size a valid groff numeric expression.  The keyword/value
                       pairs can be specified in any order.

                Boxes can be stacked, so you can start a box within another box;
                usually the later boxes would be  smaller  than  the  containing
                box,  but  this  is not enforced.  When using BOXSTART, the left
                position is the current indent minus the INDENT in the  command,
                and  the  right position is the left position (calculated above)
                plus the current line length and twice the indent.

                .BOXSTOP
                       takes no parameters.  It closes the most recently started
                       box at the current vertical  position  after  adding  its
                       INDENT spacing.

                Your  groff  documents  can  conditionally  exercise  the sboxes
                macros.  The register GSBOX is defined if the package is loaded,
                and interpolates a true value if the pdf  output  device  is  in
                use.

                sboxes furthermore hooks into the groff_ms(7) package to receive
                notifications  when  footnotes are growing, so that it can close
                boxes on a page before footnotes are printed.  When that  condi-
                tion  obtains, sboxes will close open boxes two points above the
                footnote separator and re-open them on  the  next  page.   (This
                amount probably will not match the box's INDENT.)

                See  "Using PDF boxes with groff and the ms macros" for a demon-
                stration.

     trace      aids the debugging of groff documents by  tracing  macro  calls.
                See groff_trace(7).

     www        defines    macros   corresponding   to   HTML   elements.    See
                groff_www(7).

Naming
     AT&T nroff and troff were implemented before the conventions of the  modern
     C  getopt(3) call evolved, and used a naming scheme for macro packages that
     looks oddly terse to modern eyes.  The formatter's -m option was  the  main
     means  of  loading  a macro package, and its argument had to follow immedi-
     ately without intervening space.  This looked like a long option name  pre-
     ceded  by  a  single  minus--a  sensation in the computer stone age.  Macro
     packages therefore came to be known by names that started with  the  letter
     "m",  which  was omitted from the name of the macro file as stored on disk.
     For example, the manuscript macro package was stored as tmac.s  and  loaded
     with the option -ms.  It has since become conventional in operating systems
     to  use  a  suffixed  file name extension to suggest a file type or format,
     thus we see roff documents with names ending in .man, .me, and so on.

     groff commands permit space between an option and its argument.  The syntax
     "groff -m s" makes the macro file name more clear but  may  surprise  users
     familiar  with  the  original convention, unaware that the package's "real"
     name was "s" all along.  For such packages of long pedigree, groff accommo-
     dates different users' expectations by supplying wrapper macro  files  that
     load the desired file with mso requests.  Thus, all of "groff -m s", "groff
     -m ms", "groff -ms", and "groff -mms" serve to load the manuscript macros.

Inclusion
     The  traditional  method of employing a macro package is to specify the "-m
     package" option to the formatter, which then  reads  package's  macro  file
     prior  to  any  input.   Historically,  package  was sought in a file named
     tmac.package (that is, with a "tmac."  prefix).   GNU  troff  searches  for
     package.tmac in the macro path; if not found, it looks for tmac.package in-
     stead, and vice versa.

     Alternatively,  one  could  include a macro file with the request "so file-
     name"; the argument is resolved as fopen(3) would, from the current working
     directory of the formatter.  This approach was inadequate to  locate  macro
     packages, since systems stored them in varying locations.  GNU troff offers
     an  improved  feature in the similar request "mso package-file-name", which
     searches the macro path for package-file-name.  Because its argument  is  a
     file name, its ".tmac" component must be included for the file to be found.

     If  a  sourced  file requires preprocessing, for example if it includes tbl
     tables or eqn equations, the preprocessor soelim(1) must be used.  This can
     be achieved with a pipeline or by specifying the  -s  option  to  groff(1).
     man(1)  librarian programs typically run soelim automatically.  (As a rule,
     macro packages themselves do not require preprocessing.)

Writing macros
     A roff(7) document is a text file that is enriched by predefined formatting
     constructs, such as requests, escape sequences, strings, numeric registers,
     and macros from a macro package.  roff(7) describes these elements.

     To give a document a personal style, it is most useful to extend the exist-
     ing elements by defining some macros for repeating tasks;  the  best  place
     for this is near the beginning of the document or in a separate file.

     Macros  without  arguments  are  just  like strings.  But the full power of
     macros occurs when arguments are passed with  a  macro  call.   Within  the
     macro  definition, the arguments are available as the escape sequences \$1,
     ..., \$9, \$[...], \$*, and \$@, the name under which the macro was  called
     is in \$0, and the number of arguments is in register \n[.$]; see groff(7).

   Drafting macros
     One  approach  temporarily  disables escape sequences by bracketing a macro
     definition with eo and ec requests.

            .eo
            .ds midpart was called with the following
            .de print_args
            \f[I]\$0\f[] \*[midpart] \n[.$] arguments: \$*
            ..
            .ec

     The above procedure has limitations; it is unsuitable for a macro that  re-
     quires  certain  interpolations  at the time it is defined, or for indirect
     definitions of identifiers.  See section "Copy mode" of groff(7).  In  such
     cases,  you  might define and test the macro with the escape character dou-
     bled before escape sequences that are interpreted even in copy  mode,  then
     bracket  it  with eo and ec requests, un-double the escape characters, then
     test again.

   Tips for macro definitions
     *  Use only control lines in macro definitions; that is, start every  input
        line  with  a  control character.  groff's nop request makes use of text
        lines unnecessary.

               .de Text
               .  if (\\n[.$] == 0) \
               .    return
               .  nop \&\\$*\&
               ..

     *  Write a comment macro that works in  both  draft  and  non-draft  modes;
        since  the escape character is disabled in draft mode, trouble might oc-
        cur when comment escape sequences are used.

               .de c
               ..
               .c This is my comment.

     *  Comment lengthy macro definitions.

     *  Use empty requests, and indentation after control characters, to clarify
        a macro's structure.

Authors
     This document was written by Werner Lemberg and G. Branden Robinson.

See also
     Groff: The GNU Implementation of troff, by Trent A. Fisher and Werner  Lem-
     berg,  is  the  primary groff manual.  You can browse it interactively with
     "info groff".

     groff(1)          is an overview of the groff system.

     groff_man(7),
     groff_mdoc(7),
     groff_me(7),
     groff_mm(7),
     groff_mom(7),
     groff_ms(7),
     groff_rfc1345(7),
     groff_trace(7),
     and
     groff_www(7)      are groff macro packages.

     groff(7)          summarizes the language recognized by GNU troff.

     troff(1)          documents the default macro file search path.

groff 1.24.1                       2026-03-15                      groff_tmac(5)
