HOSTNAME(5)                         hostname                         HOSTNAME(5)

NAME
     hostname - Local hostname configuration file

SYNOPSIS
     /etc/hostname

DESCRIPTION
     The  /etc/hostname  file  configures  the  name of the local system. Unless
     overridden as described in the next section, systemd(1) will set this host-
     name during boot using the sethostname(2) system call.

     The file should contain a single newline-terminated hostname  string.  Com-
     ments  (lines starting with a "#") are ignored. The hostname should be com-
     posed of up to 64 7-bit ASCII lower-case alphanumeric characters or hyphens
     forming a valid DNS domain name. It is strongly recommended that this  name
     contains  only a single DNS label, i.e does not contain any dots. This rec-
     ommendation reflects both usual expectations of applications, and the  fact
     that  the Linux kernel limits the length of the system hostname to 64 (i.e.
     close to the maximum DNS label length of 63) rather than 255  (the  maximum
     DNS  domain name length). When applied, invalid characters will be filtered
     out in an attempt to make the name valid, but obviously it  is  recommended
     to use a valid name and not rely on this filtering.

     If the question mark character "?" appears in the hostname, it is automati-
     cally substituted by a hexadecimal character derived from the machine-id(5)
     when  applied, securely and deterministically by cryptographic hashing. Ex-
     ample: "foobar-????-????" will automatically expand  to  "foobar-92a9-061c"
     or similar, depending on the local machine ID.

     You  may use hostnamectl(1) to change the value of this file during runtime
     from the command line. Use systemd-firstboot(1) to initialize it on mounted
     (but not booted) system images.

HOSTNAME SEMANTICS
     systemd(1) and the associated tools will obtain the hostname in the follow-
     ing ways:

     *   If the kernel command  line  parameter  systemd.hostname=  specifies  a
         valid hostname, systemd(1) will use it to set the hostname during early
         boot, see kernel-command-line(7),

     *   Otherwise,  the  "static"  hostname  specified  by /etc/hostname as de-
         scribed above will be used.

     *   Otherwise, a transient hostname may be set during runtime, for  example
         based on information in a DHCP lease, see systemd-hostnamed.service(8).
         Both NetworkManager[1] and systemd-networkd.service(8) allow this. Note
         that  systemd-hostnamed.service(8)  gives higher priority to the static
         hostname, so the transient hostname will only be  used  if  the  static
         hostname is not configured.

     *   Otherwise,  a  fallback hostname configured at compilation time will be
         used ("archlinux").

     Effectively, the static hostname has higher priority than a transient host-
     name, which has higher priority than the fallback hostname. Transient host-
     names are equivalent, so setting a new transient hostname causes the previ-
     ous transient hostname to be forgotten. The hostname specified on the  ker-
     nel  command  line is like a transient hostname, with the exception that it
     has higher priority when the machine boots. Also note that  those  are  the
     semantics implemented by systemd tools, but other programs may also set the
     hostname.

HISTORY
     The  simple  configuration file format of /etc/hostname originates from De-
     bian GNU/Linux.

SEE ALSO
     systemd(1), sethostname(2), hostname(1),  hostname(7),  machine-id(5),  ma-
     chine-info(5), hostnamectl(1), systemd-hostnamed.service(8), systemd-first-
     boot(1)

NOTES
      1. NetworkManager
         https://developer.gnome.org/NetworkManager/stable/

systemd 260.1                                                        HOSTNAME(5)
