MACHINE-INFO(5)                   machine-info                   MACHINE-INFO(5)

NAME
     machine-info - Local machine information file

SYNOPSIS
     /etc/machine-info

DESCRIPTION
     The /etc/machine-info file contains machine metadata.

     The  format of machine-info is a newline-separated list of environment-like
     shell-compatible variable assignments, ignoring comments and  empty  lines.
     It is possible to source the configuration from shell scripts, however, be-
     yond  mere  variable  assignments no shell features are supported, allowing
     applications to read the file without implementing a shell compatible  exe-
     cution engine. See os-release(5) for a detailed description of the format.

     /etc/machine-info  contains  metadata  about the machine that is set by the
     user or administrator. The settings configured here have the highest prece-
     dence. When not set, appropriate values may  be  determined  automatically,
     based  on  the information about the hardware or other configuration files.
     It is thus completely fine for this file to not be present.

     You may use hostnamectl(1) to change the settings of  this  file  from  the
     command line.

OPTIONS
     The  following  machine  metadata  parameters  may  be  set  using /etc/ma-
     chine-info:

   Machine Information
     PRETTY_HOSTNAME=
         A pretty human-readable UTF-8 machine identifier  string.  This  should
         contain  a  name  like "Lennart's Laptop" which is useful to present to
         the user and does not suffer by the syntax limitations of internet  do-
         main  names.  If  possible,  the  internet  hostname  as  configured in
         /etc/hostname should be kept similar to  this  one.  Example:  if  this
         value  is  "Lennart's  Computer" an Internet hostname of "lennarts-com-
         puter" might be a good choice. If this parameter is not set, an  appli-
         cation  should fall back to the Internet hostname for presentation pur-
         poses.

     ICON_NAME=
         An icon identifying this machine according to the XDG Icon Naming Spec-
         ification[1]. If this parameter is not set, an application should  fall
         back to "computer" or a similar icon name.

     CHASSIS=
         The  chassis  type. Currently, the following chassis types are defined:
         "desktop",  "laptop",  "convertible",  "server",  "tablet",  "handset",
         "watch",  and "embedded", as well as the special chassis types "vm" and
         "container" for virtualized systems that  lack  an  immediate  physical
         chassis.

         Note  that  most  systems allow detection of the chassis type automati-
         cally (based on firmware information or suchlike). This setting  should
         only  be  used  to override a misdetection or to manually configure the
         chassis type where automatic detection is not available.

         Added in version 197.

     DEPLOYMENT=
         Describes the system deployment environment. One of  the  following  is
         suggested: "development", "integration", "staging", "testing", "produc-
         tion".

         Added in version 216.

     LOCATION=
         Describes  the  system  location  if  applicable and known. Takes a hu-
         man-friendly, free-form string. This may be as generic as "Berlin, Ger-
         many" or as specific as "Left Rack, 2nd Shelf".

         Added in version 216.

     HARDWARE_VENDOR=
         Specifies the hardware vendor. If unspecified, the hardware vendor  set
         in DMI or hwdb(7) will be used.

         Added in version 251.

     HARDWARE_MODEL=
         Specifies the hardware model. If unspecified, the hardware model set in
         DMI or hwdb(7) will be used.

         Added in version 251.

     HARDWARE_SKU=
         Specifies  the  hardware  SKU (Stock-Keeping Unit). If unspecified, the
         hardware SKU set in DMI will be used.

         Added in version 258.

     HARDWARE_VERSION=
         Specifies the hardware version. If unspecified,  the  hardware  version
         set in DMI will be used.

         Added in version 258.

   Custom Fields
     Operating  system  vendors  and  systemd administrators may extend the file
     format and introduce new fields. It is highly  recommended  to  prefix  new
     fields  with  an  OS-specific name in order to avoid name clashes. Applica-
     tions reading this file must ignore unknown fields.

     Example: "_LOCAL_EMERGENCY_CONTACT="user@example.org"".

EXAMPLE
         PRETTY_HOSTNAME="Lennart's Tablet"
         ICON_NAME=computer-tablet
         CHASSIS=tablet
         DEPLOYMENT=production

SEE ALSO
     systemd(1), os-release(5), hostname(5), machine-id(5), hostnamectl(1), sys-
     temd-hostnamed.service(8)

NOTES
      1. XDG Icon Naming Specification
         https://standards.freedesktop.org/icon-naming-spec/icon-naming-spec-latest.html

systemd 260.1                                                    MACHINE-INFO(5)
