The  format  is  a  textual format that describes a collection of
filesystem objects.  Such files are typically used to  create  or
verify  directory  hierarchies.   An file consists of a series of
lines, each providing information about a single  filesystem  ob-
ject.   Leading whitespace is always ignored.  When encoding file
or pathnames, any backslash character or character outside of the
95 printable ASCII characters must be encoded as a backslash fol-
lowed by three octal digits.  When reading mtree files,  any  ap-
pearance  of a backslash followed by three octal digits should be
converted into the corresponding character.  Each line is  inter-
preted  independently  as one of the following types: Blank lines
are ignored.  Lines beginning with are ignored.  Lines  beginning
with  are  special  commands that influence the interpretation of
later lines.  If the first whitespace-delimited word has no char-
acters, it is the name of a file in the current  directory.   Any
relative entry that describes a directory changes the current di-
rectory.   As  a special case, a relative entry with the filename
changes the current directory to the parent  directory.   Options
on  dot-dot entries are always ignored.  If the first whitespace-
delimited word has a character after the first character,  it  is
the pathname of a file relative to the starting directory.  There
can  be  multiple  full  entries  describing the same file.  Some
tools that process files may require that multiple lines describ-
ing the same file occur consecutively.  It is not  permitted  for
the  same  file  to be mentioned using both a relative and a full
file specification.  Two special commands are currently  defined:
This command defines default values for one or more keywords.  It
is  followed on the same line by one or more whitespace-separated
keyword definitions.  These definitions apply  to  all  following
files that do not specify a value for that keyword.  This command
removes  any default value set by a previous command.  It is fol-
lowed on the same line by  one  or  more  keywords  separated  by
whitespace.   After  the  filename, a full or relative entry con-
sists of zero or more whitespace-separated  keyword  definitions.
Each  such  definition  consists of a key from the following list
immediately followed by an '=' sign and a value.   Software  pro-
grams  reading  mtree  files  should warn about unrecognized key-
words.  Currently supported keywords are as follows: The checksum
of the file using the default algorithm specified by the utility.
The device number for or file types.  The value must  be  one  of
the  following  forms:  A device with and optional fields.  Their
meaning is specified by the  operating's  system  See  below  for
valid  formats.   Opaque  number  (as stored on the file system).
The following values for are recognized: and  See  for  more  de-
tails.   The  full  pathname of a file that holds the contents of
this file.  The file flags as a symbolic name.  See for  informa-
tion on these names.  If no flags are to be set the string may be
used  to  override  the current default.  The file group as a nu-
meric value.  The file group as a symbolic name.  Ignore any file
hierarchy below this file.  The inode number.  The target of  the
symbolic  link  when  type=link.   The  MD5 message digest of the
file.  A synonym for The current file's permissions as a  numeric
(octal)  or symbolic value.  The number of hard links the file is
expected to have.  Make sure this file or  directory  exists  but
otherwise  ignore  all  attributes.  The file is optional; do not
complain about the file if it is not in the file hierarchy.   The
device  number  of  the file, e.g. the ID of the device that con-
tains the file.  Its format is the same as the one for  The  mes-
sage  digest  of the file.  A synonym for A synonym for The 160-1
message digest of the file.  A synonym for The 180-2 message  di-
gest  of the file.  A synonym for The 180-2 message digest of the
file.  A synonym for The 180-2 message digest  of  the  file.   A
synonym  for The size, in bytes, of the file.  The last modifica-
tion time of the file.  The type of the file; may be set  to  any
one  of the following: block special device character special de-
vice directory fifo regular file symbolic link  socket  The  file
owner  as  a  numeric  value.  The file owner as a symbolic name.
The utility appeared in The digest capability was added in in re-
sponse to the widespread use of programs which can spoof The  and
digests were added in as new attacks have demonstrated weaknesses
in  The  digest  was added in Support for file flags was added in
and mostly comes from The entry format was added by


