PKGBUILD(5)                       Pacman Manual                      PKGBUILD(5)

NAME
     PKGBUILD - Package build description file

SYNOPSIS
     PKGBUILD

DESCRIPTION
     This  manual  page describes general rules about PKGBUILDs. Once a PKGBUILD
     is written, the actual package is built using makepkg  and  installed  with
     pacman.

         Note

         An   example   PKGBUILD,   useful   for   reference,   is   located  in
         /usr/share/pacman along with other example files  such  as  an  install
         script.  You can copy the provided PKGBUILD.proto file to a new package
         build directory and make customizations to suit your needs.

OPTIONS AND DIRECTIVES
     The following is a list of standard options and  directives  available  for
     use in a PKGBUILD. These are all understood and interpreted by makepkg, and
     most  of them will be directly transferred to the built package. The manda-
     tory fields for a minimally functional PKGBUILD are pkgname, pkgver, pkgrel
     and arch.

     If you need to create any custom variables for use in your  build  process,
     it  is  recommended  to prefix their name with an _ (underscore). This will
     prevent any possible name clashes with internal makepkg variables. For  ex-
     ample,  to store the base kernel version in a variable, use something simi-
     lar to $_basekernver.

     pkgname (array)
         Either the name of the package or an array of names for split packages.
         Valid characters for members of this array are alphanumerics,  and  any
         of  the  following characters: "@ . _ + -". Additionally, names are not
         allowed to start with hyphens or dots.

     pkgver
         The version of the software as released from the author (e.g.,  2.7.1).
         The variable is not allowed to contain colons, forward slashes, hyphens
         or whitespace.

         The  pkgver  variable  can  be  automatically  updated  by  providing a
         pkgver() function in the PKGBUILD that outputs the new package version.
         This is run after downloading and extracting the  sources  and  running
         the  prepare()  function (if present), so it can use those files in de-
         termining the new pkgver. This is most useful when  used  with  sources
         from version control systems (see below).

     pkgrel
         This  is  the  release number specific to the distribution. This allows
         package maintainers to make updates to the package's  configure  flags,
         for  example. This is typically set to 1 for each new upstream software
         release and incremented for intermediate PKGBUILD updates. The variable
         is a positive integer, with an optional subrelease level  specified  by
         adding another positive integer separated by a period (i.e. in the form
         x.y).

     epoch
         Used  to  force  the package to be seen as newer than any previous ver-
         sions with a lower epoch, even if the version number would normally not
         trigger such an upgrade. This value is required to be a positive  inte-
         ger;  the  default  value if left unspecified is 0. This is useful when
         the version numbering scheme of a package changes (or is alphanumeric),
         breaking normal version comparison logic. See pacman(8) for more infor-
         mation on version comparisons.

     pkgdesc
         This should be a brief description of the package and  its  functional-
         ity. Try to keep the description to one line of text and to not use the
         package's name.

     url
         This  field  contains  a URL that is associated with the software being
         packaged. This is typically the project's web site.

     license (array)
         This field specifies the license(s) that apply to the package. If  mul-
         tiple licenses are applicable, list all of them: license=('GPL' 'FDL').

     install
         Specifies  a special install script that is to be included in the pack-
         age. This file should reside in the same directory as the PKGBUILD  and
         will  be copied into the package by makepkg. It does not need to be in-
         cluded in the source array (e.g., install=$pkgname.install).

     changelog
         Specifies a changelog file that is to be included in the  package.  The
         changelog  file should end in a single newline. This file should reside
         in the same directory as the PKGBUILD and will be copied into the pack-
         age by makepkg. It does not need to be included  in  the  source  array
         (e.g., changelog=$pkgname.changelog).

     source (array)
         An  array  of  source files required to build the package. Source files
         must either reside in the same directory  as  the  PKGBUILD,  or  be  a
         fully-qualified  URL that makepkg can use to download the file. To sim-
         plify the maintenance of PKGBUILDs, use the $pkgname and $pkgver  vari-
         ables  when  specifying  the download location, if possible. Compressed
         files will be extracted automatically unless found in the noextract ar-
         ray described below.

         Additional architecture-specific sources can be added by  appending  an
         underscore and the architecture name e.g., source_x86_64=(). There must
         be   a   corresponding   integrity  array  with  checksums,  e.g.   ck-
         sums_x86_64=().

         It is also possible to change the name of the downloaded file, which is
         helpful with weird URLs and for handling multiple source files with the
         same name. The syntax is: source=('filename::url').

         makepkg also supports building developmental versions of packages using
         sources downloaded from version control systems (VCS). For more  infor-
         mation, see Using VCS Sources below.

         Files in the source array with extensions .sig, .sign or, .asc are rec-
         ognized  by makepkg as PGP signatures and will be automatically used to
         verify the integrity of the corresponding source file.

     validpgpkeys (array)
         An array of PGP fingerprints. If this array is non-empty, makepkg  will
         only  accept  signatures  from the keys listed here and will ignore the
         trust values from the keyring. If the source file  was  signed  with  a
         subkey, makepkg will still use the primary key for comparison.

         Only  full  fingerprints  are accepted. They must be uppercase and must
         not contain whitespace characters.

     noextract (array)
         An array of file names corresponding to those from  the  source  array.
         Files  listed  here  will  not be extracted with the rest of the source
         files. This is useful for packages that use compressed data directly.

     cksums (array)
         This array contains CRC checksums for every source  file  specified  in
         the  source  array (in the same order). makepkg will use this to verify
         source file integrity during subsequent builds. If SKIP is put  in  the
         array  in  place  of a normal hash, the integrity check for that source
         file will be skipped. To easily generate cksums,  run  "makepkg  -g  >>
         PKGBUILD". If desired, move the cksums line to an appropriate location.
         Note  that checksums generated by "makepkg -g" should be verified using
         checksum values provided by the software developer.

     md5sums, sha1sums, sha224sums, sha256sums, sha384sums,  sha512sums,  b2sums
     (arrays)
         Alternative  integrity  checks  that makepkg supports; these all behave
         similar to the cksums option described above. To enable use and genera-
         tion of these checksums, be sure to set up the  INTEGRITY_CHECK  option
         in makepkg.conf(5).

     groups (array)
         An  array of symbolic names that represent groups of packages, allowing
         you to install multiple packages by requesting a single target. For ex-
         ample, one could install all KDE packages by installing the kde group.

     arch (array)
         Defines on which architectures the given package  is  available  (e.g.,
         arch=('i686' 'x86_64')). Packages that contain no architecture specific
         files should use arch=('any'). Valid characters for members of this ar-
         ray are alphanumerics and "_".

     backup (array)
         An  array  of  file  names,  without  preceding slashes, that should be
         backed up if the package is removed or upgraded. This is commonly  used
         for  packages placing configuration files in /etc. See "Handling Config
         Files" in pacman(8) for more information.

     depends (array)
         An array of packages this package depends on to run.  Entries  in  this
         list  should  be surrounded with single quotes and contain at least the
         package name. Entries can also include a  version  requirement  of  the
         form  name<>version,  where  <> is one of five comparisons: >= (greater
         than or equal to), <= (less than or equal to), = (equal to), > (greater
         than), or < (less than).

         If the dependency name appears to be a library (ends with .so), makepkg
         will try to find a binary that depends on  the  library  in  the  built
         package and append the version needed by the binary. Appending the ver-
         sion yourself disables automatic detection.

         Additional  architecture-specific  depends can be added by appending an
         underscore and the architecture name e.g., depends_x86_64=().

     makedepends (array)
         An array of packages this package depends  on  to  build  but  are  not
         needed  at runtime. Packages in this list follow the same format as de-
         pends.

         Additional architecture-specific makedepends can be added by  appending
         an underscore and the architecture name e.g., makedepends_x86_64=().

     checkdepends (array)
         An  array of packages this package depends on to run its test suite but
         are not needed at runtime. Packages in this list follow the same format
         as depends. These dependencies are only  considered  when  the  check()
         function is present and is to be run by makepkg.

         Additional architecture-specific checkdepends can be added by appending
         an underscore and the architecture name e.g., checkdepends_x86_64=().

     optdepends (array)
         An  array of packages (and accompanying reasons) that are not essential
         for base functionality, but may be necessary to make full  use  of  the
         contents  of  this  package. optdepends are currently for informational
         purposes only and are not utilized by pacman during dependency  resolu-
         tion.  Packages in this list follow the same format as depends, with an
         optional description appended. The format for specifying optdepends de-
         scriptions is:

             optdepends=('python: for library bindings')

         Additional architecture-specific optdepends can be added  by  appending
         an underscore and the architecture name e.g., optdepends_x86_64=().

     conflicts (array)
         An  array  of  packages that will conflict with this package (i.e. they
         cannot both be installed at the same time). This directive follows  the
         same format as depends. Versioned conflicts are supported using the op-
         erators as described in depends.

         Additional architecture-specific conflicts can be added by appending an
         underscore and the architecture name e.g., conflicts_x86_64=().

     provides (array)
         An  array  of "virtual provisions" this package provides. This allows a
         package to provide dependencies other than its own  package  name.  For
         example,  the  dcron package can provide cron, which allows packages to
         depend on cron rather than dcron OR fcron.

         Versioned provisions are also possible, in the name=version format. For
         example, dcron can provide cron=2.0 to satisfy the cron>=2.0 dependency
         of other packages. Provisions involving the > and < operators  are  in-
         valid as only specific versions of a package may be provided.

         If  the provision name appears to be a library (ends with .so), makepkg
         will try to find the library in the built package and append  the  cor-
         rect  version. Appending the version yourself disables automatic detec-
         tion.

         Additional architecture-specific provides can be added by appending  an
         underscore and the architecture name e.g., provides_x86_64=().

     replaces (array)
         An  array  of packages this package should replace. This can be used to
         handle renamed/combined packages. For example, if the j2re  package  is
         renamed  to  jre,  this directive allows future upgrades to continue as
         expected even though the package has moved. Versioned replaces are sup-
         ported using the operators as described in depends.

         Sysupgrade is currently the only pacman operation  that  utilizes  this
         field. A normal sync or upgrade will not use its value.

         Additional  architecture-specific replaces can be added by appending an
         underscore and the architecture name e.g., replaces_x86_64=().

     options (array)
         This array allows you to override some of  makepkg's  default  behavior
         when  building packages. To set an option, just include the option name
         in the options array. To reverse the default behavior, place an "!"  at
         the front of the option. Only specify the options you specifically want
         to  override, the rest will be taken from makepkg.conf(5).  NOTE: force
         is a now-removed option in favor of the top level epoch variable.

         strip
             Strip symbols from binaries and libraries. If you frequently use  a
             debugger  on  programs  or  libraries, it may be helpful to disable
             this option.

         docs
             Save doc directories. If you wish to delete doc directories,  spec-
             ify !docs in the array.

         libtool
             Leave  libtool  (.la) files in packages. Specify !libtool to remove
             them.

         staticlibs
             Leave static library (.a) files in packages. Specify !staticlibs to
             remove them (if they have a shared counterpart).

         emptydirs
             Leave empty directories in packages.

         zipman
             Compress man and info pages with gzip.

         ccache
             Allow the use of ccache during build(). More useful in its negative
             form !ccache with select packages that have problems building  with
             ccache.

         distcc
             Allow the use of distcc during build(). More useful in its negative
             form  !distcc with select packages that have problems building with
             distcc.

         buildflags
             Allow  the  use  of  user-specific  buildflags  (CPPFLAGS,  CFLAGS,
             CXXFLAGS,  LDFLAGS) during build() as specified in makepkg.conf(5).
             More useful in its negative form !buildflags with  select  packages
             that have problems building with custom buildflags.

         makeflags
             Allow  the  use of user-specific makeflags during build() as speci-
             fied in makepkg.conf(5). More useful in its  negative  form  !make-
             flags  with select packages that have problems building with custom
             makeflags such as -j2 (or higher).

         debug
             Add the user-specified debug flags  (DEBUG_CFLAGS,  DEBUG_CXXFLAGS)
             to  their  counterpart  buildflags as specified in makepkg.conf(5).
             When used in combination with the `strip' option, a separate  pack-
             age containing the debug symbols is created.

         lto
             Enable  building  packages using link time optimization. Adds -flto
             to both CFLAGS and CXXFLAGS.

     Additional architecture-specific options can be added by appending  an  un-
     derscore and the architecture name e.g., options_x86_64=().

     xdata (array)
         This  array  allows you to add additional metadata to the package. This
         data is neither used by pacman nor by makepkg; It has  purely  informa-
         tional purpose, or may be interpreted by third-party tools.

         All entries in that array must have the form key=value, where key is an
         arbitrary  non-empty  string  and value must not contain an equal sign.
         Furthermore, the key "pkgtype" is reserved for the makepkg program.

PACKAGING FUNCTIONS
     In addition to the above directives, PKGBUILDs require a set  of  functions
     that  provide  instructions to build and install the package. As a minimum,
     the PKGBUILD must contain a package() function which installs all the pack-
     age's files into the packaging directory, with optional prepare(), build(),
     and check() functions being used to create those files from source.

     This is directly sourced and executed by makepkg, so anything that Bash  or
     the system has available is available for use here. Be sure any exotic com-
     mands used are covered by the makedepends array.

     If  you  create  any variables of your own in any of these functions, it is
     recommended to use the Bash local keyword to scope the variable  to  inside
     the function.

     package() Function
         The package() function is used to install files into the directory that
         will  become  the  root directory of the built package and is run after
         all the optional functions listed below. The packaging stage is run us-
         ing fakeroot to ensure correct file permissions in the resulting  pack-
         age.  All other functions will be run as the user calling makepkg. This
         function is run inside $srcdir.

     verify() Function
         An optional verify() function can be specified to  implement  arbitrary
         source  authentication. The function should return a non-zero exit code
         when verification fails. This function is run before  sources  are  ex-
         tracted. This function is run inside $startdir.

     prepare() Function
         An  optional prepare() function can be specified in which operations to
         prepare the sources for building, such as patching, are performed. This
         function is run after the source  extraction  and  before  the  build()
         function.  The  prepare() function is skipped when source extraction is
         skipped. This function is run inside $srcdir.

     build() Function
         The optional build() function is used  to  compile  and/or  adjust  the
         source  files in preparation to be installed by the package() function.
         This function is run inside $srcdir.

     check() Function
         An optional check() function can be  specified  in  which  a  package's
         test-suite  may  be  run.  This function is run between the build() and
         package() functions. Be sure any exotic commands used  are  covered  by
         the checkdepends array. This function is run inside $srcdir.

     All  of  the above variables such as $pkgname and $pkgver are available for
     use in the packaging functions. In addition, makepkg defines the  following
     variables:

     srcdir
         This  contains  the  directory  where  makepkg extracts, or copies, all
         source files.

     pkgdir
         This contains the directory where makepkg bundles the  installed  pack-
         age.  This directory will become the root directory of your built pack-
         age. This variable should only be used in the package() function.

     startdir
         This contains the absolute path to the directory where the PKGBUILD  is
         located, which is usually the output of $(pwd) when makepkg is started.
         Use of this variable is deprecated and strongly discouraged.

PACKAGE SPLITTING
     makepkg supports building multiple packages from a single PKGBUILD. This is
     achieved  by  assigning an array of package names to the pkgname directive.
     Each split package uses a corresponding packaging function with name  pack-
     age_foo(), where foo is the name of the split package.

     All  options  and  directives  for the split packages default to the global
     values given in the PKGBUILD. Nevertheless, the following ones can be over-
     ridden within each split package's packaging function: pkgdesc, arch,  url,
     license,   groups,  depends,  optdepends,  provides,  conflicts,  replaces,
     backup, options, install, and changelog.

     Note that makepkg does not consider split package depends when checking  if
     dependencies are installed before package building and with --syncdeps. All
     packages  required  to make the package are required to be specified in the
     global depends and makedepends arrays.

     An optional global directive is available when building a split package:

     pkgbase
         The name used to refer to the  group  of  packages  in  the  output  of
         makepkg  and  in  the naming of source-only tarballs. If not specified,
         the first element in the pkgname array is used.  Valid  characters  for
         this  variable  are alphanumerics, and any of the following characters:
         "@ . _ + -". Additionally, the variable is not allowed  to  start  with
         hyphens or dots.

INSTALL/UPGRADE/REMOVE SCRIPTING
     Pacman  has the ability to store and execute a package-specific script when
     it installs, removes, or upgrades a package. This allows a package to  con-
     figure  itself  after  installation and perform an opposite action upon re-
     moval.

     The exact time the script is run varies with each operation, and should  be
     self-explanatory.  Note  that  during an upgrade operation, none of the in-
     stall or remove functions will be called.

     Scripts are passed either one or two "full version strings", where  a  full
     version  string is either pkgver-pkgrel or epoch:pkgver-pkgrel, if epoch is
     non-zero.

     pre_install
         Run right before files are extracted. One argument is passed: new pack-
         age full version string.

     post_install
         Run right after files are extracted. One argument is passed: new  pack-
         age full version string.

     pre_upgrade
         Run  right before files are extracted. Two arguments are passed in this
         order: new package  full  version  string,  old  package  full  version
         string.

     post_upgrade
         Run  after files are extracted. Two arguments are passed in this order:
         new package full version string, old package full version string.

     pre_remove
         Run right before files are removed. One argument is passed: old package
         full version string.

     post_remove
         Run right after files are removed. One argument is passed: old  package
         full version string.

     To  use  this  feature, create a file such as pkgname.install and put it in
     the same directory as the PKGBUILD script. Then use the install directive:

         install=pkgname.install

     The install script does not need to be specified in  the  source  array.  A
     template  install  file  is available in /usr/share/pacman as proto.install
     for reference with all of the available functions defined.

USING VCS SOURCES
     Building a developmental version of a package using sources from a  version
     control system (VCS) is enabled by specifying the source in the form:

         source=('directory::url#fragment?query')

     Currently  makepkg supports the Bazaar, Git, Subversion, Fossil and Mercur-
     ial version control systems. For  other  version  control  systems,  manual
     cloning of upstream repositories must be done in the prepare() function.

     Some VCS Sources like Git support pinning the checkout by a checksum of its
     content using deterministic export functionality like "git archive".

     The source URL is divided into four components:

     directory
         (optional)  Specifies  an alternate directory name for makepkg to down-
         load the VCS source into.

     url
         The URL to the VCS repository. This must include the  VCS  in  the  URL
         protocol for makepkg to recognize this as a VCS source. If the protocol
         does  not  include  the  VCS name, it can be added by prefixing the URL
         with vcs+. For example, using a Git repository over HTTPS would have  a
         source URL in the form: git+https://....

     fragment
         (optional) Allows specifying a revision number or branch for makepkg to
         checkout  from the VCS. A fragment has the form type=value, for example
         to checkout a given revision the source line would be source=(url#revi-
         sion=123). The available types depends on the VCS being used:

         bzr
             revision (see 'bzr help revisionspec' for details)

         fossil
             branch, commit, tag

         git
             branch, commit, tag

         hg
             branch, revision, tag

         svn
             revision

     query
         (optional) Allows specifying whether a VCS checkout should  be  checked
         for  PGP-signed  revisions.  The  source  line  should  have the format
         source=(url#fragment?signed) or source=(url?signed#fragment). Currently
         only supported by Git.

EXAMPLE
     The following is an example PKGBUILD for the patch package. For more  exam-
     ples, look through the build files of your distribution's packages.

         # Maintainer: Joe User <joe.user@example.com>

         pkgname=patch
         pkgver=2.7.1
         pkgrel=1
         pkgdesc="A utility to apply patch files to original sources"
         arch=('i686' 'x86_64')
         url="https://www.gnu.org/software/patch/patch.html"
         license=('GPL')
         groups=('base-devel')
         depends=('glibc')
         makedepends=('ed')
         optdepends=('ed: for "patch -e" functionality')
         source=("ftp://ftp.gnu.org/gnu/$pkgname/$pkgname-$pkgver.tar.xz"{,.sig})
         sha256sums=('9124ba46db0abd873d0995c2ca880e81252676bb6c03e0a37dfc5f608a9b0ceb'
                     'SKIP')

         build() {
                 cd "$srcdir/$pkgname-$pkgver"
                 ./configure --prefix=/usr
                 make
         }

         package() {
                 cd "$srcdir/$pkgname-$pkgver"
                 make DESTDIR="$pkgdir/" install
         }

SEE ALSO
     makepkg(8), pacman(8), makepkg.conf(5)

     See  the pacman website at https://archlinux.org/pacman/ for current infor-
     mation on pacman and its related tools.

BUGS
     Bugs? You must be kidding; there are no bugs in this software.  But  if  we
     happen to be wrong, please report them to the issue tracker at https://git-
     lab.archlinux.org/pacman/pacman/-/issues  with specific information such as
     your command-line, the nature of the bug, and even the package database  if
     it helps.

AUTHORS
     Current maintainers:

     *   Allan McRae <allan@archlinux.org>

     *   Andrew Gregory <andrew.gregory.8@gmail.com>

     *   Morgan Adamiec <morganamilo@archlinux.org>

     Past major contributors:

     *   Judd Vinet <jvinet@zeroflux.org>

     *   Aurelien Foret <aurelien@archlinux.org>

     *   Aaron Griffin <aaron@archlinux.org>

     *   Dan McGee <dan@archlinux.org>

     *   Xavier Chantry <shiningxc@gmail.com>

     *   Nagy Gabor <ngaba@bibl.u-szeged.hu>

     *   Dave Reisner <dreisner@archlinux.org>

     *   Eli Schwartz <eschwartz@archlinux.org>

     For  additional contributors, use git shortlog -s on the pacman.git reposi-
     tory.

Pacman 7.1.0                       2026-05-06                        PKGBUILD(5)
