term(5)                           File formats                           term(5)

NAME
     term - compiled terminfo terminal description

DESCRIPTION
     tic(1)  compiles  a  terminfo  terminal type description, and setupterm(3X)
     reads it.  A compiled description may be stored in a file or in a  database
     of,  potentially,  many such descriptions.  Further, a compiled description
     may be in one of two formats: one similar to that used by System V,  and  a
     newer, extensible format employed exclusively by ncurses.

   Storage Location
     Compiled   terminfo   descriptions   are   placed   under   the   directory
     /usr/share/terminfo.  One of two configurations is selected  when  building
     the ncurses libraries.

     directory tree
          A  two-level  scheme  is  used to avoid a linear search of a huge Unix
          system directory: /usr/share/terminfo/c/name where name is the name of
          the terminal, and c is the first character of name.   Thus,  the  com-
          piled  description  of  terminal  type  "act4"  is  found  in the file
          /usr/share/terminfo/a/act4.  Synonyms for the same terminal are imple-
          mented by multiple links to the same compiled file.

     hashed database
          Using the Berkeley database API, two types of records are stored:  the
          terminfo  data  in  the same format as that stored in a directory tree
          with the terminal's primary type name as a key, and records containing
          only aliases pointing to the primary name.

          If built to write hashed databases, ncurses can  still  read  terminfo
          databases organized as a directory tree, but cannot write entries into
          the  directory  tree.  It can write (or rewrite) entries in the hashed
          database.

          ncurses distinguishes the two cases in the TERMINFO and  TERMINFO_DIRS
          environment  variable  by  assuming  a directory tree for entries that
          correspond to an existing directory, and a hashed database otherwise.

   Legacy Storage Format
     The format has been chosen so that it will be the same on all hardware.   A
     byte of at least eight bits' width is assumed, but no assumptions about bit
     ordering or sign extension are made.

     The file is divided into six parts:

          (a) header,

          (b) terminal names,

          (c) Boolean flags,

          (d) numbers,

          (e) strings, and

          (f) a string table.

     The  header section begins the file.  This section contains six short inte-
     gers in the format described below.  These integers are

          (1) the magic number
               (octal 0432);

          (2) the size,
               in bytes, of the terminal names section;

          (3) the number of bytes in the Boolean flags section;

          (4) the number of short integers in the numbers section;

          (5) the number of offsets
               (short integers) in the strings section;

          (6) the size,
               in bytes, of the string table.

     The capabilities in the Boolean flags, numbers, and strings sections are in
     the same order as in the header file term.h.

     Short integers are signed, in the range -32768 to 32767, and stored in lit-
     tle-endian format.

     Numbers in a terminal description, whether they are entries in the  numbers
     or strings table, are positive integers.  Boolean flags are treated as pos-
     itive one-byte integers.  In each case, those positive integers represent a
     terminal  capability.   The terminal compiler tic uses negative integers to
     handle the cases where a capability is not available:

     *   If a capability is absent from this terminal, tic stores a  -1  in  the
         corresponding table.

         The integer value -1 is represented by two bytes 0377, 0377.
         Absent Boolean values are represented by the byte 0 (false).

     *   If  a  capability has been canceled from this terminal, tic stores a -2
         in the corresponding table.

         The integer value -2 is represented by two bytes 0377, 0376.
         The Boolean value -2 is represented by the byte 0376.

     *   Other negative values are illegal.

     The terminal names section comes after the header.  It contains  the  first
     line  of the terminfo description, listing the various names for the termi-
     nal, separated by the "|" character.  The terminal names section is  termi-
     nated with an ASCII NUL character.

     The Boolean flags section has one byte for each flag.  Boolean capabilities
     are  either  1  or 0 (true or false) according to whether the terminal sup-
     ports the given capability or not.

     Between the Boolean flags section and the number section, a null byte  will
     be  inserted,  if necessary, to ensure that the number section begins on an
     even byte This is a relic  of  the  PDP-11's  word-addressed  architecture,
     originally  designed  to avoid traps induced by addressing a word on an odd
     byte boundary.  All short integers are aligned on a short word boundary.

     The numbers section is similar to the Boolean flags section.  Each capabil-
     ity takes up two bytes, and is stored as a little-endian short integer.

     The strings section is also similar.  Each capability is stored as a  short
     integer.  The capability value is an index into the string table.

     The  string  table  is  the last section.  It contains all of the values of
     string capabilities referenced in the  strings  section.   Each  string  is
     null-terminated.   Special  characters  in  ^X or \c notation are stored in
     their interpreted form, not the printing representation.  Padding  informa-
     tion  $<nn> and parameter information %x are stored intact in uninterpreted
     form.

   Extended Storage Format
     The previous section describes the  conventional  terminfo  binary  format.
     With  some  minor variations of the offsets (see PORTABILITY), the same bi-
     nary format is used in all modern Unix systems.  Each system uses  a  stan-
     dard set of Boolean, numeric, or string capabilities.

     The  ncurses  libraries  and  applications support extended terminfo binary
     format, allowing users to define capabilities that are loaded  at  runtime.
     This  extension is made possible by using the fact that the other implemen-
     tations stop reading the terminfo data when they reach the end of the  size
     given in the header.  ncurses checks the size, and if it exceeds that spec-
     ified in the header, continues to parse according to its own scheme.

     First, it reads the extended header (5 short integers):

          (1)  count of extended Boolean capabilities

          (2)  count of extended numeric capabilities

          (3)  count of extended string capabilities

          (4)  count of the items in extended string table

          (5)  size of the extended string table in bytes

     The  count-  and  size-values for the extended string table include the ex-
     tended capability names as well as extended capability values.

     Using the counts and sizes, ncurses allocates arrays and reads data for the
     extended capabilities in the same order as the header information.

     The extended string table contains values for string  capabilities.   After
     the end of these values, it contains the names for each of the extended ca-
     pabilities in order: Boolean, numeric, and string.

     By  storing terminal descriptions in this way, ncurses is able to provide a
     database useful with legacy applications, as well as providing data for ap-
     plications that require more information about a terminal type than was an-
     ticipated by X/Open Curses.  See user_caps(5) for an overview  of  the  way
     ncurses uses this extended information.

     Applications  that  manipulate  terminal  data  can use the definitions de-
     scribed in term_variables(3X) associating the long  capability  names  with
     members of a TERMTYPE structure.

   Extended Number Format
     On  occasion, 16-bit signed integers are not large enough.  ncurses 6.1 in-
     troduced a new format by making a few changes to the legacy format:

     *   a different magic number (octal 01036)

     *   changing the type for the number array from signed 16-bit  integers  to
         signed 32-bit integers.

     To maintain compatibility, the library presents the same data structures to
     direct  users  of  the TERMTYPE structure as in previous formats.  However,
     that cannot provide callers with the extended numbers.  The library uses  a
     similar  but  hidden data structure TERMTYPE2 to provide data for the term-
     info functions.

FILES
     /usr/share/terminfo
            compiled terminal description database

PORTABILITY
   setupterm
     Note that it is possible for setupterm to expect a different set  of  capa-
     bilities  than  are  actually present in the file.  Either the database may
     have been updated since setupterm was recompiled (resulting in extra unrec-
     ognized entries in the file) or the program may have been  recompiled  more
     recently than the database was updated (resulting in missing entries).  The
     routine setupterm must be prepared for both possibilities - this is why the
     numbers  and  sizes  are  included.   Also, new capabilities must always be
     added at the end of the lists of Boolean, number, and string capabilities.

   Binary Format
     X/Open Curses does not specify a format for the  terminfo  database.   Sys-
     tem V  curses  used  a directory-tree of binary files, one per terminal de-
     scription.

     Despite the consistent use of little-endian numbers and the otherwise self-
     describing format, it is not wise to count on portability of  binary  term-
     info  entries  between commercial Unix versions.  The problem is that there
     are at least three versions of terminfo (under HP-UX, AIX, and OSF/1)  each
     of  which  diverged  from System V terminfo after SVr1, and added extension
     capabilities to the string table that (in the binary format)  collide  with
     System V  and  X/Open Curses extensions.  See terminfo(5) for detailed dis-
     cussion of terminfo source compatibility issues.

     This implementation is by default compatible with the binary terminfo  for-
     mat  used by Solaris curses, except in a few less-used details where it was
     found that the latter did not match X/Open Curses.  The format used by  the
     other  Unix versions can be matched by building ncurses with different con-
     figuration options.

   Magic Codes
     The magic number in a binary terminfo  file  is  the  first  16  bits  (two
     bytes).   Besides  making  it more reliable for the library to check that a
     file is terminfo, utilities such as file(1) also use that to tell what  the
     file-format  is.   System V  defined more than one magic number, with 0433,
     0435 as screen-dumps (see scr_dump(5)).  This implementation uses 01036  as
     a  continuation  of  that sequence, but with a different high-order byte to
     avoid confusion.

   The TERMTYPE Structure
     Direct access to the TERMTYPE structure is  provided  for  legacy  applica-
     tions.   Portable  applications  should use tigetflag(3X) and related func-
     tions to read terminal capabilities.

   Mixed-case Terminal Names
     A small number of terminal descriptions use uppercase characters  in  their
     names.  If the underlying file system ignores the difference between upper-
     case  and lowercase, ncurses represents the "first character" of the termi-
     nal name used as the intermediate level of a directory tree in (two-charac-
     ter) hexadecimal form.

   Limits
     ncurses stores compiled terminal descriptions in three related formats, de-
     scribed in the subsections

     *   Legacy Storage Format, and

     *   Extended Storage Format, and

     *   Extended Number Format.

     The legacy storage format and the extended  number  format  differ  by  the
     types  of  numeric  capability that they can store (for example, 16- versus
     32-bit integers).  The extended storage format introduced  by  ncurses  5.0
     adds data to either of these formats.

     Some limitations apply:

     *   total compiled entries cannot exceed 4096 bytes in the legacy format.

     *   total  compiled  entries cannot exceed 32768 bytes in the extended for-
         mat.

     *   the name field cannot exceed 128 bytes.

     Compiled entries are limited  to  32768  bytes  because  offsets  into  the
     strings  table  use  two-byte  integers.  The legacy format could have sup-
     ported 32768-byte entries, but was limited to a virtual memory page's  4096
     bytes.

EXAMPLES
     Here  is a terminfo description of the Lear-Siegler ADM-3, a popular though
     rather stupid early terminal.

     adm3a|lsi adm3a,
             am,
             cols#80, lines#24,
             bel=^G, clear=\032$<1>, cr=^M, cub1=^H, cud1=^J,
             cuf1=^L, cup=\E=%p1%{32}%+%c%p2%{32}%+%c, cuu1=^K,
             home=^^, ind=^J,

     A hexadecimal dump of its compiled terminal description (in legacy  format)
     follows.

     Lp-1.   0000   1a  01  10 00 02 00 03 00  82 00 31 00 61 64 6d 33  ........
     ..1.adm3 0010  61 7c 6c 73 69 20 61 64  6d 33 61 00 00 01 50 00   a|lsi  ad
     m3a...P.   0020  ff ff 18 00 ff ff 00 00  02 00 ff ff ff ff 04 00  ........
     ........  0030  ff ff ff ff ff ff ff ff  0a 00 25 00 27 00 ff ff   ........
     ..%.'...   0040  29 00 ff ff ff ff 2b 00  ff ff 2d 00 ff ff ff ff  ).....+.
     ..-.....  0050  ff ff ff ff ff ff ff ff  ff ff ff ff ff ff ff ff   ........
     ........   0060  ff ff ff ff ff ff ff ff  ff ff ff ff ff ff ff ff  ........
     ........  0070  ff ff ff ff ff ff ff ff  ff ff ff ff ff ff ff ff   ........
     ........   0080  ff ff ff ff ff ff ff ff  ff ff ff ff ff ff ff ff  ........
     ........  0090  ff ff ff ff ff ff ff ff  ff ff ff ff ff ff ff ff   ........
     ........   00a0  ff ff ff ff ff ff ff ff  ff ff ff ff ff ff ff ff  ........
     ........  00b0  ff ff ff ff ff ff ff ff  ff ff ff ff ff ff ff ff   ........
     ........   00c0  ff ff ff ff ff ff ff ff  ff ff ff ff ff ff ff ff  ........
     ........  00d0  ff ff ff ff ff ff ff ff  ff ff ff ff ff ff ff ff   ........
     ........   00e0  ff ff ff ff ff ff ff ff  ff ff ff ff ff ff ff ff  ........
     ........  00f0  ff ff ff ff ff ff ff ff  ff ff ff ff ff ff ff ff   ........
     ........   0100  ff ff ff ff ff ff ff ff  ff ff ff ff ff ff ff ff  ........
     ........  0110  ff ff ff ff ff ff ff ff  ff ff ff ff ff ff ff ff   ........
     ........   0120  ff ff ff ff ff ff 2f 00  07 00 0d 00 1a 24 3c 31  ....../.
     .....$<1 0130  3e 00 1b 3d 25 70 31 25  7b 33 32 7d 25 2b 25  63   >..=%p1%
     {32}%+%c  0140   25 70 32 25 7b 33 32 7d  25 2b 25 63 00 0a 00 1e  %p2%{32}
     %+%c....  0150  00 08 00 0c 00 0b 00 0a  00                        ........
     .

AUTHORS
     Thomas E. Dickey
     extended terminfo format for ncurses 5.0
     hashed database support for ncurses 5.6
     extended number support for ncurses 6.1

     Eric S. Raymond
     documented legacy terminfo format (that used by pcurses).

SEE ALSO
     curses(3X), curs_terminfo(3X), terminfo(5), user_caps(5)

ncurses 6.6                        2025-08-16                            term(5)
