The utility can play, record, mix, and process audio files on the
fly.   During  playback,  reads  audio data concurrently from all
played files, mixes it and plays the result on the device.  Simi-
larly, it stores audio data recorded from the device into  corre-
sponding  files.   An  mode  could be used to process audio files
without involving audio hardware.   Processing  includes:  Change
the sound encoding.  Route the sound from one channel to another.
Control  the  per-file playback volume.  Finally, can accept MIDI
messages usable for: Volume control.  Start,  stop  and  relocate
playback  and  recording.  The options are as follows: The buffer
size of the audio device in frames.  Default is 7680.  The  audio
file  channels  count.   The default is 2, i.e. stereo.  Increase
log verbosity.  Encoding of the audio file.  The default  is  En-
coding  names use the following scheme: signedness or followed by
the precision in bits, the byte-order or the number of bytes  per
sample,  and  the alignment or Only the signedness and the preci-
sion are mandatory.  Examples: Use  this  audio  device.   Device
mode  and parameters are determined from audio files.  Default is
Go to the given time position and  start  playback  or  recording
there.   This  option  is  equivalent to an incoming MMC relocate
message with the same position.  The position is expressed as the
number of samples (at device sample rate).  Audio file type.  The
following file types are supported: Headerless  file.   Microsoft
WAV   file   format.   Apple's  audio  interchange  file  format.
Sun/NeXT audio file format.  Try to guess, depending on the  file
name.  This is the default.  Play this audio file.  If the option
argument  is  then  standard  input  will be used.  Map the given
range of source channels into  the  given  range  of  destination
channels.   Off-line mode.  Read input files and store the result
in the output files, processing them on the fly.   This  mode  is
useful  to  mix,  demultiplex,  resample or re-encode audio files
off-line.  It requires at least one input and one  output  Record
into  this  audio  file.  If the option argument is then standard
output will be used.  Time offset where the beginning of the file
belongs.  The first sample of the file will be played or recorded
when the device reaches the given position.  The position is  ex-
pressed  as  the number of samples (at device sample rate).  Con-
trol audio device properties through this MIDI  port.   This  in-
cludes per-stream volumes and the ability to synchronously start,
stop and relocate audio files.  Sample rate in Hertz of the audio
file.   The default is Software volume attenuation of the file to
play.  The value must be between  1  and  127,  corresponding  to
-42dB  and  -0dB attenuation in 1/3dB steps.  The default is 127,
i.e. no attenuation.  On the command  line,  per-file  parameters
must  precede  the  file  definition  If is sent or it terminates
recording to files.  can be controlled through MIDI as follows: a
MIDI channel is assigned  to  each  stream,  and  the  volume  is
changed  using  the  standard  volume controller (number 7).  The
master volume can be changed using  the  standard  master  volume
system  exclusive message.  All audio files are controlled by the
following MMC messages: All files are relocated to the  requested
time  position.   If  it is beyond the end of a file, the file is
temporarily disabled until a valid position is requested.   Play-
back  and/or  recording is started.  Playback and/or recording is
stopped and all files are rewound back to the starting  position.
MIDI  control  is intended to be used together with For instance,
the following command will create two devices: the default and  a
MMC-controlled  one  $ sndiod -r 48000 -z 480 -s default -t slave
-s mmc Programs using behave normally, while programs using  wait
for the MMC start signal and start synchronously.  Then, the fol-
lowing  command will play a file on the audio device, giving full
control to MIDI software or hardware connected to the MIDI  port:
$  aucat -f snd/mmc -q midithru/0 -i file.wav At this stage, will
start, stop and relocate automatically following all user actions
in the MIDI sequencer, assuming it's configured to  transmit  MMC
on and Furthermore, the MIDI sequencer could be configured to use
the  port as MTC clock source, assured to be synchronous to play-
back of Mix and play two files while recording a  third  file:  $
aucat  -i  file1.wav  -i file2.wav -o file3.wav Record channels 2
and 3 into one stereo file and channels  6  and  7  into  another
stereo  file  using  a 44.1kHz sampling rate for both: $ aucat -r
44100 -m 2:3/0:1 -o file1.wav -m 6:7/0:1  -o  file2.wav  Split  a
stereo file into two mono files: $ aucat -n -i stereo.wav -c 1 -m
0:0/0:0  -o left.wav \         -m 1:1/0:0 -o right.wav Resampling
is low quality.  There are limitations inherent to the  and  file
formats:  not all encodings are supported, file sizes are limited
to 2GB, and the files must support the operation (e.g.  pipes  do
not support it).


