creates  and manipulates streaming archive files.  This implemen-
tation can extract from tar, pax, cpio, zip, jar, ar,  xar,  rar,
rpm,  7-zip,  and  ISO 9660 cdrom images and can create tar, pax,
cpio, ar, zip, 7-zip, and shar archives.  The first synopsis form
shows a option word.  This usage is  provided  for  compatibility
with  historical  implementations.   See  below for details.  The
other synopsis forms show the preferred usage.  The first  option
to  is  a  mode  indicator  from the following list: Create a new
archive containing the specified items.  The long option form  is
Like but new entries are appended to the archive.  Note that this
only works on uncompressed archives stored in regular files.  The
option  is  required.   The long option form is List archive con-
tents to stdout.  The long option form is Like  but  new  entries
are  added  only  if they have a modification date newer than the
corresponding entry in the archive.  Note that this only works on
uncompressed archives stored in regular files.  The option is re-
quired.  The long form is Extract to disk from the archive.  If a
file with the same name appears more than once  in  the  archive,
each  copy  will be extracted, with later copies overwriting (re-
placing) earlier copies.  The long option form  is  In  or  mode,
each  specified  file or directory is added to the archive in the
order specified on the command line.  By default, the contents of
each directory are also archived.  In extract or list  mode,  the
entire  command  line  is  read  and parsed before the archive is
opened.  The pathnames or patterns on the command  line  indicate
which  items  in  the  archive should be processed.  Patterns are
shell-style globbing patterns as documented  in  Unless  specifi-
cally  stated  otherwise, options are applicable in all operating
modes.  (c and r modes only) The specified archive is opened  and
the  entries in it will be appended to the current archive.  As a
simple example, writes a new archive to standard output  contain-
ing a file and all of the entries from In contrast, creates a new
archive  with only two entries.  Similarly, reads an archive from
standard input (whose format will  be  determined  automatically)
and converts it into a gzip-compressed pax-format archive on std-
out.   In this way, can be used to convert archives from one for-
mat to another.  (c mode only) Use the archive suffix to decide a
set of the format and the compressions.   As  a  simple  example,
creates  a  new  archive with restricted pax format and gzip com-
pression, creates a new archive with restricted  pax  format  and
bzip2 compression and uuencode compression, creates a new archive
with  zip  format,  ignores the option, and creates a new archive
with restricted pax format and gzip compression, if it is unknown
suffix or no suffix, creates a new archive  with  restricted  pax
format and bzip2 compression.  (c, r, u, x modes only) Archive or
extract  POSIX.1e  or NFSv4 ACLs.  This is the reverse of and the
default behavior in c, r, and u modes (except on Mac OS X) or  if
is run in x mode as root.  On Mac OS X this option translates ex-
tended  ACLs to NFSv4 ACLs.  To store extended ACLs the option is
preferred.  Ignored for compatibility with other implementations.
Specify the block size, in 512-byte records, for tape drive  I/O.
As  a  rule,  this  argument  is only needed when reading from or
writing to tape drives, and usually not even then as the  default
block  size of 20 records (10240 bytes) is very common.  In c and
r mode, this changes the directory before  adding  the  following
files.   In  x mode, change directories after opening the archive
but before extracting entries from the archive.  (x mode only) to
the current directory after processing any options and before ex-
tracting any files.  (use with Only set the modification time  if
the file is newer than the date specified in (x mode only) Before
removing file system objects to replace them, clear platform-spe-
cific  file  attributes or file flags that might prevent removal.
Do not process files or directories that match the specified pat-
tern.  Note that exclusions  take  precedence  over  patterns  or
filenames specified on the command line.  Do not process files or
directories  internally  used  by the version control systems and
(c, r, u, x modes only) Archive or extract platform-specific file
attributes or file flags.  This is the reverse of and the default
behavior in c, r, and u modes or if is run in  x  mode  as  root.
(c,  r,  u  mode  only)  Use the specified format for the created
archive.  Supported formats include and Other formats may also be
supported; see for  more  information  about  currently-supported
formats.   In  r and u modes, when extending an existing archive,
the format specified here must be compatible with the  format  of
the existing archive on disk.  Read the archive from or write the
archive  to the specified file.  The filename can be for standard
input or standard output.  The default varies by system;  on  the
default  is  on  Linux,  the default is Use the provided group id
number.  On extract, this overrides the group id in the  archive;
the  group  name in the archive will be ignored.  On create, this
overrides the group id read from disk; if is not also  specified,
the  group  name will be set to match the group id.  Use the pro-
vided group name.  On extract, this overrides the group  name  in
the  archive;  if  the  provided group name does not exist on the
system, the group id (from the archive or from the  option)  will
be  used  instead.  On create, this sets the group name that will
be stored in the archive; the name will not be  verified  against
the  system  group  database.   Use the provided group, if is not
provided, can be either a group name or numeric id.  See the  op-
tion  for  details.  (c and r modes only) Symbolic links named on
the command line will be followed; the target of the link will be
archived, not the link itself.  (c and r modes only) Synonym  for
Synonym  for  Show usage.  (x mode only) Mac OS X specific (v10.6
or later). Compress extracted regular files  with  HFS+  compres-
sion.   An alias of for compatibility with GNU tar.  Process only
files or directories that match the specified pattern.  Note that
exclusions specified with take precedence over inclusions.  If no
inclusions are explicitly specified, all entries are processed by
default.   The  option  is  especially  useful   when   filtering
archives.   For  example,  the command creates a new archive con-
taining only the entries from containing the string (c mode only)
Compress the resulting archive with In  extract  or  list  modes,
this option is ignored.  Note that this implementation recognizes
XZ  compression  automatically  when  reading  archives.  (c mode
only) Compress the resulting archive  with  In  extract  or  list
modes,  this  option  is  ignored.  Note that this implementation
recognizes bzip2 compression automatically when reading archives.
(x mode only) Do not overwrite existing files.  In particular, if
a file appears more than once in an archive,  later  copies  will
not overwrite earlier copies.  (x mode only) Do not overwrite ex-
isting  files  that  are newer than the versions appearing in the
archive being extracted.  (c and r modes only) All symbolic links
will be followed.  Normally, symbolic links are archived as such.
With this option, the target of the link  will  be  archived  in-
stead.   (c  and r modes only) Issue a warning message unless all
links to each file are archived.  (c mode only) Compress the  re-
sulting archive with In extract or list modes, this option is ig-
nored.   Note  that this implementation recognizes lrzip compres-
sion automatically when reading archives.  (c mode only) Compress
the archive with lz4-compatible compression  before  writing  it.
In extract or list modes, this option is ignored.  Note that this
implementation  recognizes  lz4  compression  automatically  when
reading archives.  (c mode only) Compress the archive with  zstd-
compatible  compression  before  writing  it.  In extract or list
modes, this option is ignored.   Note  that  this  implementation
recognizes  zstd compression automatically when reading archives.
(c mode only) Compress the resulting archive  with  the  original
LZMA  algorithm.   In  extract  or list modes, this option is ig-
nored.  Use of this option is discouraged and new archives should
be created with instead.  Note that  this  implementation  recog-
nizes  LZMA  compression automatically when reading archives.  (c
mode only) Compress the resulting archive with In extract or list
modes, this option is ignored.   Note  that  this  implementation
recognizes  LZO  compression automatically when reading archives.
(x mode only) Do not extract modification time.  By default,  the
modification  time is set to the time stored in the archive.  (c,
r, u and x mode only) Mac OS X specific.  Archive or extract  ex-
tended  ACLs  and  extended  file attributes using in AppleDouble
format.  This is the reverse of and the default behavior in c, r,
and u modes or if is run in x mode as root.  Currently  supported
only  for  pax  formats (c, r, u modes only) Set the modification
times of added files to the specified date.  Do not  operate  re-
cursively  on  the  content of directories.  (c, r, u modes only)
Only include files and directories newer than the specified date.
This compares ctime entries.  (c, r, u modes only) Like except it
compares mtime entries instead of ctime entries.  (c, r, u  modes
only) Only include files and directories newer than the specified
file.   This  compares  ctime entries.  (c, r, u modes only) Like
except it compares mtime entries instead of  ctime  entries.   (c
and  r  modes  only)  Honor the nodump file flag by skipping this
file.  (x mode only) Mac OS X specific (v10.6 or later).  Do  not
compress  extracted regular files which were compressed with HFS+
compression before archived.  By default,  compress  the  regular
files  again  with  HFS+  compression.  (use with or Filenames or
patterns are separated by null characters, not by newlines.  This
is often used to read filenames output by the option to (c, r, u,
x modes only) Do not archive or extract POSIX.1e or  NFSv4  ACLs.
This is the reverse of and the default behavior if is run as non-
root  in x mode (on Mac OS X as any user in c, r, u and x modes).
(c, r, u, x modes only) Do not archive or extract file attributes
or file flags.  This is the reverse of and the  default  behavior
if  is  run as non-root in x mode.  (c, r, u and x mode only) Mac
OS X specific.  Do not archive or extract ACLs and extended  file
attributes  using  in AppleDouble format.  This is the reverse of
and the default behavior if is run as non-root in x mode.  (c, r,
u modes only) Do not read  sparse  file  information  from  disk.
This  is  the  reverse  of  (x mode only) Do not create temporary
files and use to replace the original ones.  This is the  reverse
of (x mode only) Do not extract owner and group IDs.  This is the
reverse  of  and  the default behavior if is run as non-root.  (x
mode only) Do not extract full permissions  (SGID,  SUID,  sticky
bit,  file attributes or file flags, extended file attributes and
ACLs).  This is the reverse of and the default behavior if is run
as non-root.  (c, r, u, x modes only) Do not archive  or  extract
extended file attributes.  This is the reverse of and the default
behavior  if is run as non-root in x mode.  This is equivalent to
On extract, it causes user and group names in the archive  to  be
ignored  in  favor of the numeric user and group ids.  On create,
it causes user and group names to not be stored in  the  archive.
(x,  t modes only) In extract (-x) mode, files will be written to
standard out rather than being extracted to disk.  In  list  (-t)
mode,  the file listing will be written to stderr rather than the
usual stdout.  (x mode) Use the user and group of the  user  run-
ning  the  program  rather  than  those specified in the archive.
Note that this has no significance unless is specified,  and  the
program  is  being  run by the root user.  In this case, the file
modes and flags from the archive will be restored,  but  ACLs  or
owner  information  in  the  archive will be discarded.  (c, r, u
mode) A synonym for (c, r, u modes only) Only include  files  and
directories  older  than the specified date.  This compares ctime
entries.  (c, r, u modes only) Like except it compares mtime  en-
tries  instead  of  ctime entries.  (c, r, u modes only) Only in-
clude files and directories older than the specified file.   This
compares ctime entries.  (c, r, u modes only) Like except it com-
pares  mtime  entries  instead  of  ctime  entries.  (c, r, and u
modes) Do not cross mount points.  Select optional behaviors  for
particular  modules.   The  argument  is a text string containing
comma-separated keywords and values.  These  are  passed  to  the
modules  that handle particular formats to control how those for-
mats will behave.  Each option has one of  the  following  forms:
The  key  will be set to the specified value in every module that
supports it.  Modules that do not support this  key  will  ignore
it.   The  key  will be enabled in every module that supports it.
This is equivalent to The key will be disabled  in  every  module
that  supports it.  As above, but the corresponding key and value
will be provided only to modules whose name matches The  complete
list of supported modules and keys for create and append modes is
in  and  for  extract and list modes in Examples of supported op-
tions: Support Joliet extensions.  This is  enabled  by  default,
use  or  to disable.  Support Rock Ridge extensions.  This is en-
abled by default, use or to disable.  A decimal integer from 1 to
9 specifying the gzip compression level.  Store timestamp.   This
is  enabled  by  default,  use or to disable.  Use as compression
method.  Supported values are bzip2, gzip, lzo (ultra fast),  and
zpaq (best, extremely slow).  A decimal integer from 1 to 9 spec-
ifying  the lrzip compression level.  A decimal integer from 1 to
9 specifying the lzop compression level.  Enable stream checksum.
This is by default, use to disable.  Enable block checksum  (Dis-
abled  by default).  A decimal integer from 4 to 7 specifying the
lz4 compression block size (7 is set by default).  Use the previ-
ous block of the block being compressed for a compression dictio-
nary to improve compression ratio.  A decimal integer  specifying
the  zstd  compression level.  Supported values depend on the li-
brary version, common values are from 1 to 22.  Specify the  num-
ber  of  worker  threads  to  use, or 0 to use as many threads as
there are CPU cores in the system.  Start a new compression frame
at the beginning of each file in  the  archive.   In  combination
with do not start a new compression frame unless the uncompressed
size  of  the current frame is at least bytes.  The number may be
followed by or to indicate kilobytes, megabytes or gigabytes  re-
spectively.   In  combination with do not start a new compression
frame unless the compressed size of the current frame is at least
bytes.  The number may be followed by or to  indicate  kilobytes,
megabytes  or  gigabytes  respectively.   Start a new compression
frame as soon as possible after the uncompressed size of the cur-
rent frame exceeds bytes.  The number may be followed  by  or  to
indicate  kilobytes, megabytes or gigabytes respectively.  Values
less than 1,024 will be rejected.  Start a new compression  frame
as  soon  as  possible  after  the compressed size of the current
frame exceeds bytes.  The number may be followed by or  to  indi-
cate kilobytes, megabytes or gigabytes respectively.  Values less
than 1,024 will be rejected.  A decimal integer from 1 to 9 spec-
ifying the lzop compression level.  A decimal integer from 0 to 9
specifying  the  xz  compression  level.   Specify  the number of
worker threads to use.  Setting threads  to  a  special  value  0
makes  use  as many threads as there are CPU cores on the system.
The mtree writer module allows you to specify  which  mtree  key-
words  will  be  included  in the output.  Supported keywords in-
clude: The default is equivalent to: Enables  all  of  the  above
keywords.  You can also use to disable all keywords.  Enable gen-
eration of lines in the output.  Produce human-readable output by
indenting  options  and  splitting  lines to fit into 80 columns.
Use as compression method.  Supported values  are  store  (uncom-
pressed)  and  deflate (gzip algorithm).  Enable encryption using
traditional zip encryption.  Use as encryption  type.   Supported
values  are zipcrypt (traditional zip encryption), aes128 (WinZip
AES-128 encryption) and aes256 (WinZip AES-256 encryption).   Ig-
nore zeroed blocks in the archive, which occurs when multiple tar
archives  have  been concatenated together.  Without this option,
only the contents of the  first  concatenated  archive  would  be
read.   This option is comparable to the option of GNU tar.  If a
provided option is not supported by any module, that is  a  fatal
error.   Preserve  pathnames.   By  default,  absolute  pathnames
(those that begin with a / character) have the leading slash  re-
moved  both  when  creating  archives  and  extracting from them.
Also, will refuse to extract archive entries whose pathnames con-
tain or whose target directory would be  altered  by  a  symlink.
This  option  suppresses these behaviors.  (x mode only) Preserve
file permissions.  Attempt to restore the full  permissions,  in-
cluding  file modes, file attributes or file flags, extended file
attributes and ACLs, if available, for each item  extracted  from
the  archive.  This is the reverse of and the default if is being
run as root.  It can be partially overridden by  also  specifying
or  The  is used to extract or create an encrypted archive.  Cur-
rently, zip is the only supported format  that  supports  encryp-
tion.  You shouldn't use this option unless you realize how inse-
cure  use  of this option is.  (c, r, u mode only) Synonym for (x
and t mode only) Extract or list only  the  first  archive  entry
that  matches  each pattern or filename operand.  Exit as soon as
each specified pattern or filename has been matched.  By default,
the archive is always read to the very end, since  there  can  be
multiple entries with the same name and, by convention, later en-
tries  overwrite  earlier  entries.  This option is provided as a
performance optimization.  (c, r, u modes only) Read sparse  file
information  from  disk.   This is the reverse of and the default
behavior.  (x mode only) Extract  files  as  sparse  files.   For
every  block  on disk, check first if it contains only NULL bytes
and  seek  over  it  otherwise.   This  works  similar   to   the
conv=sparse  option  of  dd.  Modify file or archive member names
according to The pattern has the format where is a basic  regular
expression,  is  the  replacement string of the matched part, and
the optional trailing letters modify how the replacement is  han-
dled.   If  is  not matched, the pattern is skipped.  Within ~ is
substituted with the match, \1 to \9 with the content of the cor-
responding captured group.  The  optional  trailing  g  specifies
that  matching should continue after the matched part and stop on
the first unmatched pattern.  The optional trailing  s  specifies
that the pattern applies to the value of symbolic links.  The op-
tional  trailing p specifies that after a successful substitution
the original path name and the new path name should be printed to
standard error.  The optional trailing b specifies that the  sub-
stitution  should  be  matched  from  the beginning of the string
rather than from right after the position at which  the  previous
matching  substitution ended.  Optional trailing H, R, or S char-
acters suppress substitutions for hardlink targets, regular file-
names, or symlink targets, respectively.  Optional trailing h, r,
or s characters enable substitutions for hardlink targets,  regu-
lar  filenames, or symlink targets, respectively.  The default is
which applies substitutions to all names.  In particular,  it  is
never  necessary  to  specify  h, r, or s.  (x mode only) Extract
files atomically.  By default unlinks the original file with  the
same  name as the extracted file (if it exists), and then creates
it immediately under the same name and writes to it.  For a short
period of time, applications trying to access the file might  not
find it, or see incomplete results.  If is enabled, first creates
a unique temporary file, then writes the new contents to the tem-
porary  file, and finally renames the temporary file to its final
name atomically using This guarantees that an application access-
ing the file, will either see the old contents or  the  new  con-
tents  at  all times.  (x mode only) Extract owner and group IDs.
This is the reverse of and the default  behavior  if  is  run  as
root.   Remove  the  specified  number  of leading path elements.
Pathnames with fewer elements will  be  silently  skipped.   Note
that  the  pathname  is edited after checking inclusion/exclusion
patterns but before security checks.  In x or t mode,  will  read
the list of names to be extracted from In c mode, will read names
to  be  archived  from  The special name on a line by itself will
cause the current directory to be changed to the directory speci-
fied on the following line.  Names are terminated by newlines un-
less is specified.  Note that also disables the special  handling
of  lines  containing Note:  If you are generating lists of files
using you probably want to use as well.  (c, r, u modes only) Af-
ter archiving all files, print a  summary  to  stderr.   (x  mode
only)  Unlink  files  before  creating them.  This can be a minor
performance optimization if most files  already  exist,  but  can
make things slower if most files do not already exist.  This flag
also  causes  to remove intervening directory symlinks instead of
reporting an error.  See the section below for more details.  Use
the provided user id number and ignore the  user  name  from  the
archive.  On create, if is not also specified, the user name will
be set to match the user id.  Use the provided user name.  On ex-
tract,  this  overrides the user name in the archive; if the pro-
vided user name does not exist on the system, it will be  ignored
and  the  user  id  (from the archive or from the option) will be
used instead.  On create, this sets the user name  that  will  be
stored  in the archive; the name is not verified against the sys-
tem user database.  Pipe the input (in x or t mode) or the output
(in c mode) through instead of using the builtin compression sup-
port.  Use the provided user, if is not provided, can  be  either
an  username or numeric id.  See the option for details.  Produce
verbose output.  In create and extract modes, will list each file
name as it is read from or written to the archive.  In list mode,
will produce output similar to that of An additional option  will
also  provide  ls-like details in create and extract mode.  Print
version of and and exit.  Ask for confirmation for every  action.
Read  a  list of exclusion patterns from the specified file.  See
for more information about the handling of exclusions.  (c, r, u,
x modes only) Archive or extract extended file attributes.   This
is  the  reverse of and the default behavior in c, r, and u modes
or if is run in x mode as root.  (c mode only) Compress  the  re-
sulting archive with In extract or list modes, this option is ig-
nored.   Note  that this implementation recognizes bzip2 compres-
sion automatically when reading archives.  (c mode only) Compress
the resulting archive with In extract or list modes, this  option
is  ignored.   Note  that this implementation recognizes compress
compression automatically when reading archives.  (c  mode  only)
Compress  the  resulting  archive  with In extract or list modes,
this option is ignored.  Note that this implementation recognizes
gzip compression automatically when reading archives.   The  fol-
lowing  environment variables affect the execution of The default
options for format readers and compression readers.   The  option
overrides  this.  The default options for format writers and com-
pression writers.  The option overrides this.  The locale to use.
See for more information.  The default device.  The option  over-
rides  this.   Please see the description of the option above for
more details.  The timezone to use when  displaying  dates.   See
for more information.  The following creates a new archive called
that  contains two files and To view a detailed table of contents
for this archive: To extract all entries from the archive on  the
default  tape drive: To examine the contents of an ISO 9660 cdrom
image: To move file hierarchies, invoke as or more  traditionally
In  create mode, the list of files and directories to be archived
can also include directory change instructions of  the  form  and
archive inclusions of the form For example, the command line will
create  a  new archive will read the file from the current direc-
tory and add it to the output archive.  It will  then  read  each
entry from and add those entries to the output archive.  Finally,
it  will  switch  to the directory and add to the output archive.
An input file in format can be used to create an  output  archive
with  arbitrary ownership, permissions, or names that differ from
existing data on disk: $ cat  input.mtree  #mtree  usr/bin  uid=0
gid=0   mode=0755   type=dir  usr/bin/ls  uid=0  gid=0  mode=0755
type=file content=myls $ tar -cvf output.tar @input.mtree The and
switches accept a variety of common date and time specifications,
including and The argument can be used to control various details
of archive generation or reading.  For example, you can  generate
mtree output which only contains and keywords: or you can set the
compression  level  used  by gzip or xz compression: For more de-
tails, see the explanation of the and  API  calls  that  are  de-
scribed in and The bundled-arguments format is supported for com-
patibility with historic implementations.  It consists of an ini-
tial  word  (with no leading - character) in which each character
indicates an option.  Arguments follow as  separate  words.   The
order  of the arguments must match the order of the corresponding
characters in the bundled command word.  For  example,  specifies
three  flags  and  The and flags both require arguments, so there
must be two additional items on the command line.  The is the ar-
gument to the flag, and is the argument to the  flag.   The  mode
options c, r, t, u, and x and the options b, f, l, m, o, v, and w
comply  with SUSv2.  For maximum portability, scripts that invoke
should use the bundled-argument format above, should limit  them-
selves  to  the  and modes, and the and options.  Additional long
options are provided to improve compatibility with other tar  im-
plementations.   Certain  security  issues  are  common  to  many
archiving programs, including  In  particular,  carefully-crafted
archives  can  request that extract files to locations outside of
the target directory.  This can potentially be used to cause  un-
witting  users  to  overwrite  files they did not intend to over-
write.  If the archive is being extracted by the  superuser,  any
file  on  the  system  can potentially be overwritten.  There are
three ways this can happen.  Although has mechanisms  to  protect
against  each  one,  savvy  users should be aware of the implica-
tions: Archive entries can have absolute pathnames.  By  default,
removes  the  leading  character  from filenames before restoring
them to guard against this problem.   Archive  entries  can  have
pathnames  that include components.  By default, will not extract
files containing components in their pathname.   Archive  entries
can exploit symbolic links to restore files to other directories.
An archive can restore a symbolic link to another directory, then
use  that  link  to restore a file into that directory.  To guard
against this, checks each extracted path for  symlinks.   If  the
final  path element is a symlink, it will be removed and replaced
with the archive entry.  If is specified, any  intermediate  sym-
link  will  also  be  unconditionally removed.  If neither nor is
specified, will refuse to extract the entry.   To  protect  your-
self, you should be wary of any archives that come from untrusted
sources.   You should examine the contents of an archive with be-
fore extraction.  You should use the option to ensure  that  will
not overwrite any existing files or the option to remove any pre-
existing  files.  You should generally not extract archives while
running with super-user privileges.  Note that the option to dis-
ables the security checks above and  allows  you  to  extract  an
archive  while  preserving any absolute pathnames, components, or
symlinks to other directories.  There is no current  POSIX  stan-
dard for the tar command; it appeared in but was dropped from The
options  supported  by this implementation were developed by sur-
veying a number of existing tar implementations as  well  as  the
old  POSIX specification for tar and the current POSIX specifica-
tion for pax.  The ustar and pax interchange file formats are de-
fined by for the pax command.  A command appeared in Seventh Edi-
tion Unix, which was released in January, 1979.  There have  been
numerous  other  implementations, many of which extended the file
format.  John Gilmore's public-domain implementation  (circa  No-
vember,  1987) was quite influential, and formed the basis of GNU
tar.  GNU tar was included as the standard system tar  in  begin-
ning  with  This is a complete re-implementation based on the li-
brary.  It was first released with in May,  2005.   This  program
follows  for  the  definition  of  the option.  Note that GNU tar
prior to version 1.15 treated as a synonym for the  option.   The
option  may  differ  from  historic implementations.  All archive
output is written in correctly-sized blocks, even if  the  output
is  being  compressed.   Whether  or not the last output block is
padded to a full block size varies depending on  the  format  and
the  output  device.  For tar and cpio formats, the last block of
output is padded to a full block size  if  the  output  is  being
written to standard output or to a character or block device such
as  a  tape  drive.   If the output is being written to a regular
file, the last block will not be padded.  Many  compressors,  in-
cluding and complain about the null padding when decompressing an
archive created by although they still extract it correctly.  The
compression and decompression is implemented internally, so there
may  be  insignificant  differences between the compressed output
generated by and that generated by The default should be to  read
and  write archives to the standard I/O paths, but tradition (and
POSIX) dictates  otherwise.   The  and  modes  require  that  the
archive  be  uncompressed  and located in a regular file on disk.
Other archives can be modified using mode with the extension.  To
archive a file called or you must specify it as or  respectively.
In  create  mode,  a  leading  is  always  removed.  A leading is
stripped unless the option is specified.  There needs to be  bet-
ter support for file selection on both create and extract.  There
is not yet any support for multi-volume archives.  Converting be-
tween dissimilar archive formats (such as tar and cpio) using the
convention can cause hard link information to be lost.  This is a
consequence  of the incompatible ways that different archive for-
mats store hardlink information.


