DJPEG(1)                     General Commands Manual                    DJPEG(1)

NAME
     djpeg - decompress a JPEG file to an image file

SYNOPSIS
     djpeg [ options ] [ filename ]

DESCRIPTION
     djpeg decompresses the named JPEG file, or the standard input if no file is
     named,  and  produces  an  image  file  on  the  standard  output.  PBMPLUS
     (PPM/PGM), BMP, GIF, or Targa output format can be selected.

OPTIONS
     All switch names may be abbreviated; for example, -grayscale may be written
     -gray or -gr.  Most of the "basic" switches can be abbreviated to as little
     as one letter.  Upper and lower case are equivalent (thus -BMP is the  same
     as  -bmp).   British spellings are also accepted (e.g.  -greyscale), though
     for brevity these are not mentioned below.

     The basic switches are:

     -colors N
            Reduce image to at most N colors [legacy feature].  This reduces the
            number of colors used in the output image so that it can  be  stored
            in  a colormapped file format.  This feature cannot be used when de-
            compressing lossless JPEG images.

     -quantize N
            Same as -colors.  -colors is the  recommended  name.   -quantize  is
            provided only for backward compatibility.

     -fast  Select recommended processing options for low-quality output [legacy
            feature].   (The default options are chosen for highest-quality out-
            put.)  Currently, this is equivalent to -dct fast -nosmooth -onepass
            -dither ordered.  On modern CPUs, these settings have little  or  no
            performance benefit and are retained solely for backward compatibil-
            ity.

     -grayscale
            Force  grayscale  output even if JPEG file is full-color.  This fea-
            ture cannot be used when decompressing full-color lossless JPEG  im-
            ages.

     -rgb   Force  RGB output even if JPEG file is grayscale.  This feature can-
            not be used when decompressing grayscale lossless JPEG images.

     -scale M/N
            Scale the output image by a factor M/N.  Currently the scale  factor
            must  be  M/8,  where M is an integer between 1 and 16 inclusive, or
            any reduced fraction thereof (such as 1/2, 3/4,  etc.)   Scaling  is
            handy  if the image is larger than your screen.  This feature cannot
            be used when decompressing lossless JPEG images.

     -bmp   Select BMP output format (Windows flavor).  8-bit colormapped format
            is emitted if -colors or -grayscale is specified,  or  if  the  JPEG
            file  is  grayscale; otherwise, 24-bit full-color format is emitted.
            This format can only be  used  when  decompressing  8-bit-per-sample
            JPEG images.

     -gif   Select  GIF  output format (LZW-compressed) [legacy feature].  Since
            GIF does not support more than 256 colors, -colors  256  is  assumed
            (unless  you  specify  a  smaller number of colors).  If you specify
            -fast, the default number of colors is 216.  This format can only be
            used when decompressing 8-bit-per-sample or 12-bit-per-sample  lossy
            JPEG images.

     -gif0  Select GIF output format (uncompressed) [legacy feature].  Since GIF
            does  not  support more than 256 colors, -colors 256 is assumed (un-
            less you specify a smaller number of colors).  If you specify -fast,
            the default number of colors is 216.  This format can only  be  used
            when  decompressing 8-bit-per-sample or 12-bit-per-sample lossy JPEG
            images.

     -os2   Select BMP output format (OS/2 1.x flavor) [legacy feature].   8-bit
            colormapped format is emitted if -colors or -grayscale is specified,
            or  if the JPEG file is grayscale; otherwise, 24-bit full-color for-
            mat is emitted.  This format can only  be  used  when  decompressing
            8-bit-per-sample JPEG images.

     -pnm   Select PBMPLUS (PPM/PGM) output format (this is the default format).
            PGM  is  emitted  if  the JPEG file is grayscale or if -grayscale is
            specified; otherwise PPM is emitted.

     -targa
            Select Targa output format [legacy feature].   Grayscale  format  is
            emitted if the JPEG file is grayscale or if -grayscale is specified;
            otherwise,  colormapped  format  is emitted if -colors is specified;
            otherwise, 24-bit full-color format is  emitted.   This  format  can
            only be used when decompressing 8-bit-per-sample JPEG images.

     Switches for advanced users:

     -dct int
            Use accurate integer DCT method (default).

     -dct fast
            Use less accurate integer DCT method [legacy feature].  When the In-
            dependent  JPEG Group's software was first released in 1991, the de-
            compression time for a 1-megapixel JPEG image on a mainstream PC was
            measured in minutes.  Thus, the fast integer DCT algorithm  provided
            noticeable  performance  benefits.   On modern CPUs running libjpeg-
            turbo, however, the decompression time for a 1-megapixel JPEG  image
            is  measured  in  milliseconds, and thus the performance benefits of
            the fast algorithm are much less noticeable.  On  modern  x86/x86-64
            CPUs  that  support AVX2 instructions, the fast and int methods have
            similar performance.  On other types of CPUs,  the  fast  method  is
            generally about 5-15% faster than the int method.

            If  the JPEG image was compressed using a quality level of 85 or be-
            low, then there should be little or no perceptible  quality  differ-
            ence  between  the  two  algorithms.  When decompressing images that
            were compressed using quality levels above 85, however, the  differ-
            ence between the fast and int methods becomes more pronounced.  With
            images  compressed  using  quality=97, for instance, the fast method
            incurs generally about a 4-6 dB loss in PSNR  relative  to  the  int
            method,  but  this  can be larger for some images.  If you can avoid
            it, do not use the fast method when decompressing images  that  were
            compressed  using  quality levels above 97.  The algorithm often de-
            generates for such images and can actually produce a more lossy out-
            put image than if the JPEG image had  been  compressed  using  lower
            quality levels.

     -dct float
            Use  floating-point  DCT  method [legacy feature].  The float method
            does not produce significantly more accurate results  than  the  int
            method,  and it is much slower.  The float method may also give dif-
            ferent results on different machines due to varying roundoff  behav-
            ior, whereas the integer methods should give the same results on all
            machines.

     -dither fs
            Use  Floyd-Steinberg  dithering  when quantizing colors [legacy fea-
            ture].

     -dither ordered
            Use ordered dithering when quantizing colors [legacy feature].

     -dither none
            Do not use dithering when quantizing colors  [legacy  feature].   By
            default,  Floyd-Steinberg  dithering is applied when quantizing col-
            ors.  This is slower but usually produces the best results.  Ordered
            dithering is a compromise between speed and quality.   No  dithering
            is faster but usually looks awful.  Note that these switches have no
            effect  unless  color quantization is being done.  Ordered dithering
            is only available in -onepass mode.

     -icc file
            Extract ICC color management profile to the specified file.

     -map file
            Quantize to the colors used in the specified image file [legacy fea-
            ture].  This is useful for producing multiple files  with  identical
            color  maps,  or  for forcing a predefined set of colors to be used.
            The file must be a GIF or PPM file. This  option  overrides  -colors
            and -onepass.

     -nosmooth
            Use a faster, lower-quality upsampling routine.

     -onepass
            Use  one-pass  instead  of  two-pass color quantization [legacy fea-
            ture].  The one-pass method needs less memory,  but  it  produces  a
            lower-quality  image.   -onepass  is ignored unless you also specify
            -colors N.  Also, the one-pass method is always used  for  grayscale
            output.  (The two-pass method has no improvement in that case.)

     -maxmemory N
            Set  limit  for  amount of memory to use in processing large images.
            Value is in thousands of bytes, or millions of bytes if "M"  is  at-
            tached  to  the number.  For example, -max 4m selects 4000000 bytes.
            If more space is needed, an error will occur.

     -maxscans N
            Abort if the JPEG image contains more than N  scans.   This  feature
            demonstrates  a  method  by which applications can guard against de-
            nial-of-service attacks instigated  by  specially-crafted  malformed
            JPEG images containing numerous scans with missing image data or im-
            age  data  consisting  only  of "EOB runs" (a feature of progressive
            JPEG images that allows potentially hundreds of thousands of adjoin-
            ing zero-value pixels to be represented using  only  a  few  bytes.)
            Attempting to decompress such malformed JPEG images can cause exces-
            sive  CPU  activity,  since the decompressor must fully process each
            scan (even if the scan is corrupt) before it can proceed to the next
            scan.

     -outfile name
            Send output image to the named file, not to standard output.

     -memsrc
            Load input file into memory before decompressing.  This feature  was
            implemented  mainly as a way of testing the in-memory source manager
            (jpeg_mem_src().)

     -report
            Report decompression progress.

     -skip Y0,Y1
            Decompress all rows of the JPEG image except those between Y0 and Y1
            (inclusive.)  Note that if decompression scaling is being used, then
            Y0 and Y1 are relative to the scaled image dimensions.

     -crop WxH+X+Y
            Decompress only a rectangular subregion of the  image,  starting  at
            point  X,Y  with  width  W  and  height  H.  If necessary, X will be
            shifted left to the nearest iMCU boundary, and the width will be in-
            creased accordingly.  Note that if decompression  scaling  is  being
            used,  then  X,  Y, W, and H are relative to the scaled image dimen-
            sions.  Currently this option only works with the PBMPLUS (PPM/PGM),
            GIF, and Targa output formats.

     -strict
            Treat all warnings as  fatal.   This  feature  also  demonstrates  a
            method by which applications can guard against attacks instigated by
            specially-crafted  malformed JPEG images.  Enabling this option will
            cause the decompressor to abort if the JPEG  image  contains  incom-
            plete or corrupt image data.

     -verbose
            Enable  debug  printout.  More -v's give more output.  Also, version
            information is printed at startup.

     -debug
            Same as -verbose.

     -version
            Print version information and exit.

EXAMPLES
     This example decompresses the JPEG file foo.jpg and  saves  the  output  in
     8-bit BMP format in foo.bmp:

            djpeg -bmp foo.jpg > foo.bmp

ENVIRONMENT
     JPEGMEM
            If this environment variable is set, its value is the default memory
            limit.   The  value  is  specified  as  described for the -maxmemory
            switch.  JPEGMEM overrides the default value specified when the pro-
            gram was compiled, and itself is overridden by an explicit  -maxmem-
            ory.

SEE ALSO
     cjpeg(1), jpegtran(1), rdjpgcom(1), wrjpgcom(1)
     ppm(5), pgm(5)
     Wallace,  Gregory K.  "The JPEG Still Picture Compression Standard", Commu-
     nications of the ACM, April 1991 (vol. 34, no. 4), pp. 30-44.

AUTHOR
     Independent JPEG Group

     This file was modified by The libjpeg-turbo Project to include only  infor-
     mation relevant to libjpeg-turbo, to wordsmith certain sections, and to de-
     scribe features not present in libjpeg.

                                  17 June 2024                          DJPEG(1)
