Fax Formats(1)               General Commands Manual              Fax Formats(1)

     This page, part of the Netpbm user's guide(1), describes FAX formats in re-
     lation to Netpbm facilities.

     The  ITU (formerly CCITT) publishes standards for operation of fax machines
     (the idea is to provide a way to be sure that a fax machine is able to  re-
     ceive  a fax sent by another).  These standards incidentally specify graph-
     ics file formats -- a protocol for representing a visual image in sequences
     of bits.

     The two relevant standards are called Group 3 (G3) and Group 4 (G4) (Groups
     1 and 2 are analog standards no longer in use).  Virtually  every  fax  ma-
     chine  in  existence  conforms  at least generally to at least one of these
     standards.

     The standard for Group 3 fax is defined in ITU Recommendation T.4.  In  the
     U.S.,  that  is  implemented  by  EIA standards EIA-465 and EIA-466.  These
     standards cover more than the file format as well, including how to  trans-
     mit  bits over a telephone line and procedures for handling document trans-
     missions.

     G3 faxes are 204 dots per inch (dpi) horizontally and 98 dpi (196  dpi  op-
     tionally, in fine-detail mode) vertically.

     The  standards  specify  three file formats (also called coding methods and
     compression schemes --  remember  the  standard  doesn't  mention  computer
     files;  it  talks  about  the  format of a stream of bits travelling over a
     telephone line):




     MH     This compresses in one dimension: it  compresses  individual  raster
            lines but makes no attempt to compress redundancy between lines.

            One  dimensional compression is traditionally the best a fax machine
            could handle because G3 neither assumes error free transmission  not
            retransmits when errors occur, and receiving fax machines tradition-
            ally could not afford to buffer much of a page.  It's important that
            when  there  is  an error in a raster line, its impact not spread to
            many lines after it.

            All Group 3 and Group 4 fax machines must be able to  send  and  re-
            ceive MH.

            MH  is  sometimes called 'G3,' but that is a poor name because while
            the Group 3 standard does specify MH, it has always specified  other
            formats too.

            MH  is  sometimes called 'T4' based on the name of the document that
            specifies it, ITU T.4.  But this is a poor  name  because  T.4  also
            specifies MR.



     MR     This compresses in two dimensions, horizontally and vertically.

            MR  has always been part of the Group 3 standard, but is optional (a
            Group 3 fax machine may or may not be able to send and receive it).


     MMR    This is a more advanced format than the others.   It  is  even  more
            two-dimensional  than  MR.   It is optional in the Group 3 standard,
            and didn't even exist in earlier versions of it.  It  was  developed
            specifically for the Group 4 standard, but then added to an extended
            Group 3 standard as well.

            MMR  is sometimes called Group 4, but that is a poor name because of
            the fact that it is also part of the current Group 3 standard.

            MMR is sometimes called 'T6' based on the name of the document
             that specifies it, ITU T.6.



     g3topbm converts the MH format to PBM.  pbmtog3 converts PBM to MH.

     There is no Netpbm program to convert to or from other fax formats.


TIFF
     The TIFF format is flexible enough to allow lots of different coding  meth-
     ods,  within it.  There are TIFF subformats for MH, MR, and MMR, among oth-
     ers.  These are particularly useful when you receive a fax as a TIFF file.

     tifftopnm recognizes and can convert from any of these.

     pamtotiff can convert to any of these; you use command  options  to  choose
     which.

DOCUMENT SOURCE
     This  manual  page  was  generated  by  the Netpbm tool 'makeman' from HTML
     source.  The master documentation is at

            http://netpbm.sourceforge.net/doc/faxformat.html

netpbm documentation            03 December 2008                  Fax Formats(1)
