MKINITCPIO.CONF(5)              mkinitcpio manual             MKINITCPIO.CONF(5)

NAME
     mkinitcpio.conf - mkinitcpio configuration file

SYNOPSIS
     /etc/mkinitcpio.conf

DESCRIPTION
     mkinitcpio  will  attempt to read from a configuration file each time it is
     invoked, /etc/mkinitcpio.conf by default. This file defines  several  vari-
     ables which describe the contents of the image to be generated. In addition
     to  the  "main" configuration file, drop-in configuration snippets are read
     from /etc/mkinitcpio.conf.d/*.conf. These drop-ins have  higher  precedence
     and override the main configuration file.

VARIABLES
     MODULES
         Defines an array of additional modules which should be added to the im-
         age.  Dependencies  (including  other  modules and necessary firmware),
         will also be added to the image. At runtime, the modules in this  array
         which were successfully added to the image will be explicitly loaded.

     FILES
         Defines  an  array of additional files which should be added to the im-
         age. Files are added as is, and parent directories  will  be  added  if
         needed. Files specified in this variable will override previously added
         files of the same path.

     BINARIES
         Defines  an  array  of additional binaries which should be added to the
         image. These are assumed to be  dynamic  ELF  binaries,  and  necessary
         shared library dependencies will automatically be added. However, it is
         not  considered  an error to specify a non-ELF binary in this variable.
         Parent directories will be added if needed.  Files  specified  in  this
         variable will override previously added files of the same path.

     HOOKS
         Defines  an  array of hooks which will be run during the build process.
         Order is important, as it defines the order in which hooks will be  run
         during  bootup.  Use  mkinitcpio's -L flag to list all available hooks,
         and the -H flag to display the help text for a specific hook.

     COMPRESSION
         Defines a program to filter the generated image through. The kernel un-
         derstands the compression formats  yielded  by  the  zstd(1),  gzip(1),
         bzip2(1),  lz4(1), lzop(1), lzma(1), and xz(1) compressors. If unspeci-
         fied, this setting defaults to zstd compression for  Linux  ^a  5.9  and
         gzip  compression  for  Linux < 5.9. In order to create an uncompressed
         image, define this variable as cat.

         It is not hard to realize that a filter such as a tac or rev will cause
         mkinitcpio to report success but generate a useless  image.  Similarly,
         using  a  compression  program not listed above may generate an equally
         useless image, despite being "valid".

     COMPRESSION_OPTIONS
         Defines an array of additional options to be passed to the  compression
         program.  This option is generally not used. It can be potentially dan-
         gerous and may cause invalid images to be generated without any sign of
         an error.

     MODULES_DECOMPRESS
         Switch (yes/no) to decide whether loadable  kernel  modules  and  their
         firmware  should  remain compressed or be uncompressed during initramfs
         creation. Disabled by default to avoid recompressing the files using  a
         lower  compression and to reduce RAM usage during early boot. Enable to
         allow further decreasing image size when using high  compression  (e.g.
         xz  -9e or zstd --long --ultra -22) at the expense of increased RAM us-
         age at early boot.

         Note that any compressed files will be placed in the uncompressed early
         CPIO to avoid double compression.

SEE ALSO
     mkinitcpio(8)

AUTHORS
     mkinitcpio is maintained by the Arch Linux community. Refer to the  AUTHORS
     file for a full list of contributors.

COPYRIGHT
     Copyright  mkinitcpio contributors. GPL-2.0-only.

mkinitcpio 41                      2026-04-29                 MKINITCPIO.CONF(5)
