SHADOW(5)                File Formats and Configuration                SHADOW(5)

NAME
     shadow - shadowed password file

DESCRIPTION
     shadow  is  a file which contains the password information for the system's
     accounts and optional aging information.

     This file must not be readable by regular users if password security is  to
     be maintained.

     Each line of this file contains 9 fields, separated by colons (":"), in the
     following order:

     login name
         It must be a valid account name, which exists on the system.

     encrypted password
         If the password field is empty, the user can log in without a password.
         However,  some  applications that read the /etc/shadow file might block
         access if the password field is empty.

         If the password field begins with an exclamation mark !,  the  password
         is  locked. The remaining characters on the line represent the password
         field before the password was locked.

         Refer to crypt(3) for details on how this string is interpreted.

         If the password field contains a string that is not a valid  result  of
         crypt(3),  for  instance ! or *, the user cannot use a UNIX password to
         log in. However, the user may log in the system by other means.

     date of last password change
         The date of the last password change, expressed as the number  of  days
         since 1970-01-01 00:00:00 UTC.

         The value 0 indicates that the user must change their password the next
         time they log in to the system.

         An empty field means that password aging features are disabled.

     minimum password age
         The  minimum  password age is the number of days the user must wait be-
         fore they can change their password again.

         An empty field and value 0 mean that there is no minimum password age.

     maximum password age
         The maximum password age is the number of days  after  which  the  user
         must change their password.

         After this number of days has elapsed, the password may still be valid.
         The user is prompted to change their password at the next login.

         An  empty  field means that there are no maximum password age, no pass-
         word warning period, and no password inactivity period (see below).

         If the maximum password age is lower than the minimum password age, the
         user cannot change her password.

     password warning period
         The number of days before a password expires (see the maximum  password
         age above) during which the user is warned.

         An  empty  field and value 0 mean that there is no password warning pe-
         riod.

     password inactivity period
         The number of days after a password expires (see the  maximum  password
         age  above)  during  which the password is still accepted, and the user
         must update their password at the next login.

         After the password expires and the password inactivity period  elapses,
         the user cannot log in and must contact their administrator.

         An empty string means that no inactivity period is enforced.

     account expiration date
         The  date  when  the  account  expires, expressed as the number of days
         since 1970-01-01.

         Note that account expiration differs from password expiration.  Account
         expiration  prevents the user from logging in, whereas password expira-
         tion only prevents users from logging in with their password.

         An empty field means that the account never expires.

         The value 0 should not be used, as it is interpreted either as  an  ac-
         count with no expiration or as an expiration date of 1970-01-01.

     reserved field
         This field is reserved for future use.

FILES
     /etc/passwd
         User account information.

     /etc/shadow
         Secure user account information.

     /etc/shadow-
         Backup file for /etc/shadow.

         Note  that  this file is used by the tools of the shadow toolsuite, but
         not by all user and password management tools.

SEE ALSO
     chage(1), login(1), passwd(1), passwd(5), pwck(8), pwconv(8),  pwunconv(8),
     su(1), sulogin(8).

shadow-utils 4.18.0                06/27/2025                          SHADOW(5)
