Anytopnm User Manual(0)                                  Anytopnm User Manual(0)

NAME
     anytopnm - convert an arbitrary type of image file to PBM, PGM, or PPM


SYNOPSIS
     anytopnm [file]


DESCRIPTION
     This program is part of Netpbm(1).

     anytopnm  converts the input image, which may be in any of about 100 graph-
     ics formats, to PBM, PGM, or PPM format, depending on that  nature  of  the
     input image, and outputs it to Standard Output.

     To  determine the format of the input, anytopnm uses the file program (pos-
     sibly assisted by the magic numbers file fragment included with Netpbm). If
     that fails (very few image formats have magic numbers), anytopnm  looks  at
     the filename extension.  If that fails, anytopnm punts.

     The type of the output file depends on the input image.

     anytopnm  uses  the  converters for particular graphics formats that are in
     the Netpbm package, so it can't convert any format that you  couldn't  con-
     vert  with some other Netpbm program.  What anytopnm adds is the ability to
     recognize the format and choose the appropriate Netpbm program  to  convert
     it.   For example, if you invoke anytopnm on a GIF file, anytopnm will rec-
     ognize that it is a GIF file and therefore giftopnm knows how to convert it
     to PNM, so anytopnm invokes giftopnm.

     anytopnm cannot recognize every possible input format, so you may still  be
     able to convert an image with a specific Netpbm program when anytopnm fails
     to convert it.

     If  file  indicates that the input file is compressed (either via Unix com-
     press, gzip, or bzip compression), anytopnm uncompresses it and proceeds as
     above with the uncompressed result.

     If file indicates that the input file is encoded by uuencode or btoa,  any-
     topnm decodes it and proceeds as above with the decoded result.

     If file is - or not given, anytopnm takes its input from Standard Input.


SEE ALSO
     pamfile(1), pnm(1), file man page


AUTHOR
     Copyright (C) 1991 by Jef Poskanzer.

DOCUMENT SOURCE
     This  manual  page  was  generated  by  the Netpbm tool 'makeman' from HTML
     source.  The master documentation is at

            http://netpbm.sourceforge.net/doc/anytopnm.html

netpbm documentation            05 September 2006        Anytopnm User Manual(0)
