The following options are available: When extracting a text file,
convert DOS-style line endings to Unix-style line endings.  Match
file  names  case-insensitively.  Extract to stdout/screen.  When
extracting files from the zipfile, they are  written  to  stdout.
This  is similar to but does not suppress normal output.  Extract
files into the specified directory rather than the current direc-
tory.  Update existing.  Extract only files from the zipfile if a
file with the same name already exists on disk and is older  than
the  former.   Otherwise,  the file is silently skipped.  Convert
filenames from the specified encoding.  Ignore directories stored
in the zipfile; instead, extract all files directly into the  ex-
traction directory.  Convert the names of the extracted files and
directories  to  lowercase.   List, rather than extract, the con-
tents of the zipfile.  No overwrite.  When extracting a file from
the zipfile, if a file with the same name already exists on disk,
the file is silently skipped.  Overwrite.  When extracting a file
from the zipfile, if a file with the same name already exists  on
disk,  the  existing file is replaced with the file from the zip-
file.  Extract to stdout.  When extracting files  from  the  zip-
file,  they  are  written  to  stdout.  The normal output is sup-
pressed as if was specified.  Extract  encrypted  files  using  a
password.   Putting a password on the command line using this op-
tion can be insecure.  Quiet: print less  information  while  ex-
tracting.  Test: do not extract anything, but verify the checksum
of  every  file  in the archive.  Update.  When extracting a file
from the zipfile, if a file with the same name already exists  on
disk,  the  existing file is replaced with the file from the zip-
file if and only if the latter is newer than the former.   Other-
wise,  the file is silently skipped.  List verbosely, rather than
extract, the contents of the zipfile.  This differs from by using
the long listing.  Note that most of the data is  currently  fake
and  does  not reflect the content of the archive.  Exclude files
matching the pattern Print four digit years in  listings  instead
of  two.   Emulate  mode.  Enabling mode changes the way in which
additional arguments are parsed.  Currently only mode 1  is  sup-
ported,  which  lists the file names one per line.  Optional list
of members to extract from the zipfile.   Can  include  patterns,
e.g., will extract all files and dirs below memberdir.  Note that
only  one of and may be specified.  If specified filename is then
data is read from If the environment  variable  is  defined,  the
command-line  option  has no effect, and additional debugging in-
formation will be printed to The utility aims to be  sufficiently
compatible  with  other implementations to serve as a drop-in re-
placement in the context of the system.  No attempt has been made
to replicate functionality which is not required  for  that  pur-
pose.   For  compatibility  reasons, command-line options will be
recognized if they are listed not only before but also after  the
name  of  the  zipfile.   Normally, the option should only affect
files which are marked as text files in the zipfile's central di-
rectory.  Since the library does not provide access to  that  in-
formation,  it  is  not  available  to the utility.  Instead, the
utility will assume that a file is a text file  if  no  non-ASCII
characters  are  present  within  the  first block of data decom-
pressed for that file.  If non-ASCII characters appear in  subse-
quent  blocks  of data, a warning will be issued.  The utility is
only able to process ZIP archives handled by Depending on the in-
stalled version of this may or may not include self-extracting or
ZIPX archives.  The utility appeared in The utility and this man-
ual page were written by It uses the  library  developed  by  The
utility  performs two scans of the command-line for arguments be-
fore and after the archive name, so as to maintain  compatibility
with  Info-ZIP  unzip.  As a result, the POSIX double-dash string
used to separate options from arguments will need to be repeated.
For example, to extract a "-a.jpg" from "-b.zip" with  overwrite,
one would need to invoke


