FALLOCATE(1)                      User Commands                     FALLOCATE(1)

NAME
     fallocate - preallocate or deallocate space to a file

SYNOPSIS
     fallocate [-c|-p|-z|-w] [-o offset] -l length [-n] filename

     fallocate -d [-o offset] [-l length] filename

     fallocate -r [-o offset] filename

     fallocate -x [-o offset] -l length filename

DESCRIPTION
     fallocate is used to manipulate the allocated disk space for a file, either
     to  deallocate  or preallocate it. For filesystems which support the fallo-
     cate(2) system call, preallocation is done quickly by allocating blocks and
     marking them as uninitialized, requiring no IO to the data blocks. This  is
     much faster than creating a file by filling it with zeroes.

     The exit status returned by fallocate is 0 on success and 1 on failure.

OPTIONS
     The  length and offset arguments may be followed by the multiplicative suf-
     fixes KiB (=1024), MiB (=1024*1024), and so on for GiB, TiB, PiB, EiB, ZiB,
     and YiB (the "iB" is optional, e.g., "K" has the same meaning as "KiB")  or
     the suffixes KB (=1000), MB (=1000*1000), and so on for GB, TB, PB, EB, ZB,
     and YB.

     The  options  --collapse-range,  --dig-holes, --report-holes, --punch-hole,
     --zero-range, --write-zeroes and --posix are mutually exclusive.

     -c, --collapse-range
         Removes a byte range from a file, without  leaving  a  hole.  The  byte
         range  to be collapsed starts at offset and continues for length bytes.
         At the completion of the operation, the contents of the  file  starting
         at  the location offset+length will be appended at the location offset,
         and the file will be length bytes smaller. The option  --keep-size  may
         not be specified for the collapse-range operation.

         Available  since  Linux 3.15 for ext4 (only for extent-based files) and
         XFS.

         A filesystem may place limitations on the granularity of the operation,
         in order to ensure  efficient  implementation.  Typically,  offset  and
         length  must  be a multiple of the filesystem logical block size, which
         varies according  to  the  filesystem  type  and  configuration.  If  a
         filesystem has such a requirement, the operation will fail with the er-
         ror EINVAL if this requirement is violated.

     -d, --dig-holes
         Detect  and dig holes. This makes the file sparse in-place, without us-
         ing extra disk space. The minimum size of the hole depends on  filesys-
         tem  I/O block size (usually 4096 bytes). Also, when using this option,
         --keep-size is implied. If  no  range  is  specified  by  --offset  and
         --length, then the entire file is analyzed for holes.

         You can think of this option as doing a "cp --sparse" and then renaming
         the  destination  file to the original, without the need for extra disk
         space.

         See --punch-hole for a list of supported filesystems.

     -r, --report-holes
         Scan the file and report the distribution of  holes  without  modifying
         it. Two kinds of holes are shown: file holes ^a blocks that the filesys-
         tem  has not allocated (reported by SEEK_HOLE); data holes ^a ranges in-
         side the file which are logically filled with zero bytes but still  oc-
         cupy disk space.

         For  each hole the offset, end and size in bytes are printed in verbose
         mode, followed by a summary that gives the total size and percentage of
         the file that each hole type represents by default.  If  no  offset  is
         specified with --offset, the whole file is scanned.

         This  option  is  read-only and can be used on any file to estimate how
         much space could be reclaimed by --dig-holes.

         See --punch-hole for a list of supported filesystems.

     -i, --insert-range
         Insert a hole of length bytes from offset, shifting existing data.

         Supported for XFS (since Linux 4.1) and ext4 (since Linux 4.2).

     -l, --length length
         Specifies the length of the range, in bytes.

     -n, --keep-size
         Do not modify the apparent length of the file. This may effectively al-
         locate blocks past EOF, which can be removed with a truncate.

     -o, --offset offset
         Specifies the beginning offset of the range, in bytes.

     -p, --punch-hole
         Deallocates space (i.e., creates a hole) in the byte range starting  at
         offset  and  continuing  for  length bytes. Within the specified range,
         partial filesystem blocks are zeroed, and whole filesystem  blocks  are
         removed  from  the file. After a successful call, subsequent reads from
         this range will return zeroes. This option may not be specified at  the
         same  time  as  the  --zero-range option. Also, when using this option,
         --keep-size is implied.

         Supported for XFS (since Linux 2.6.38), ext4 (since Linux  3.0),  Btrfs
         (since Linux 3.7), tmpfs (since Linux 3.5) and gfs2 (since Linux 4.16).

     -v, --verbose
         Enable verbose mode.

     -w, --write-zeroes
         Zeroes  space  in  the byte range starting at offset and continuing for
         length bytes. Within the specified range, written blocks  are  preallo-
         cated for the regions that span the holes in the file. After a success-
         ful  call, subsequent reads from this range will return zeroes and sub-
         sequent writes to that range do not require further changes to the file
         mapping metadata.

         Zeroing is done within the filesystem. The filesystem may use  a  hard-
         ware-accelerated  zeroing command or may submit regular writes. The be-
         havior depends on the filesystem design and the available hardware.

         Option --keep-size cannot be specified for the  write-zeroes  operation
         because  allocating written blocks beyond the inode size is not permit-
         ted.

     -x, --posix
         Enable POSIX operation mode. In that mode allocation  operation  always
         completes, but it may take longer time when fast allocation is not sup-
         ported by the underlying filesystem.

     -z, --zero-range
         Zeroes  space  in  the byte range starting at offset and continuing for
         length bytes. Within the specified range, blocks are  preallocated  for
         the  regions  that span the holes in the file. After a successful call,
         subsequent reads from this range will return zeroes.

         Zeroing is done within the  filesystem  preferably  by  converting  the
         range  into  unwritten  extents. This approach means that the specified
         range will not be physically zeroed out on the device (except for  par-
         tial  blocks  at  either  end of the range), and I/O is (otherwise) re-
         quired only to update metadata.

         Option --keep-size can be specified to prevent  file  length  modifica-
         tion.

         Available  since  Linux 3.14 for ext4 (only for extent-based files) and
         XFS.

     -h, --help
         Display help text and exit.

     -V, --version
         Display version and exit.

AUTHORS
     Eric Sandeen <sandeen@redhat.com>, Karel Zak <kzak@redhat.com>

SEE ALSO
     truncate(1), fallocate(2), posix_fallocate(3)

REPORTING BUGS
     For       bug       reports,       use       the       issue        tracker
     <https://github.com/util-linux/util-linux/issues>.

AVAILABILITY
     The  fallocate command is part of the util-linux package which can be down-
     loaded           from            Linux            Kernel            Archive
     <https://www.kernel.org/pub/linux/utils/util-linux/>.

util-linux 2.42.1                  2026-05-18                       FALLOCATE(1)
