GDB-ADD-INDEX(1)              GNU Development Tools             GDB-ADD-INDEX(1)

NAME
     gdb-add-index - Add index files to speed up GDB

SYNOPSIS
     gdb-add-index [-h | --help] [-v | --version] [--dwarf-5] filename

DESCRIPTION
     When  GDB finds a symbol file, it scans the symbols in the file in order to
     construct an internal symbol table.  This lets  most  GDB  operations  work
     quickly--at  the  cost of a delay early on.  For large programs, this delay
     can be quite lengthy, so GDB provides a way to build an index, which speeds
     up startup.

     To determine whether a file contains such an index, use the command  "read-
     elf -S filename": the index is stored in a section named ".gdb_index" (pre-
     DWARF 5) or ".debug_names" and ".debug_str" (DWARF 5).  Indexes can only be
     produced  on  systems  which  use  ELF binaries and DWARF debug information
     (i.e., sections named ".debug_*").

     By default gdb-add-index will add a pre-DWARF  5  ".gdb_index"  section  to
     filename.   With  --dwarf-5 the DWARF 5 section ".debug_names" is added in-
     stead.

     filename must be writable.

     gdb-add-index uses GDB, objcopy, and readelf found in the PATH  environment
     variable.  If you want to use different versions of these programs, you can
     specify them through the appropriate environment variables (see below).

     gdb-add-index  exits with status 0 if it succeeds in creating the index for
     filename or greater than 0 if an error occurs.

     See more in the GDB manual in node "Index Files" -- shell command "info  -f
     gdb -n "Index Files"".

OPTIONS
     --dwarf-5
         Add DWARF 5 sections instead of previous ".gdb_index" section.

     --help
     -h  List all options, with brief explanations.

     --version
     -v  Print version information and then exit.

ENVIRONMENT
     GDB Full  file  name  of the "gdb" program to use for index generation.  If
         not set, the PATH will be searched for a "gdb" program.

     OBJCOPY
         Full file name of the "objcopy" program to use to copy section informa-
         tion into the given file.  If not set, the PATH will be searched for  a
         "objcopy" program.

     READELF
         Full file name of the "readelf" program to use to inspect properties of
         the  given file.  If not set, the PATH will be searched for a "readelf"
         program.

SEE ALSO
     The full documentation for GDB is maintained as a Texinfo manual.   If  the
     "info"  and "gdb" programs and GDB's Texinfo documentation are properly in-
     stalled at your site, the command

             info gdb

     should give you access to the complete manual.

     Using GDB: A Guide to the GNU Source-Level Debugger,  Richard  M.  Stallman
     and Roland H. Pesch, July 1991.

COPYRIGHT
     Copyright (c) 1988-2025 Free Software Foundation, Inc.

     Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document under
     the  terms  of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3 or any later
     version published by the Free Software Foundation; with the Invariant  Sec-
     tions  being  "Free Software" and "Free Software Needs Free Documentation",
     with the Front-Cover Texts being "A GNU Manual," and  with  the  Back-Cover
     Texts as in (a) below.

     (a) The FSF's Back-Cover Text is: "You are free to copy and modify this GNU
     Manual.   Buying  copies  from GNU Press supports the FSF in developing GNU
     and promoting software freedom."

gdb-17.1                           2025-12-20                   GDB-ADD-INDEX(1)
