This  manual page describes POSIX Access Control Lists, which are
used to define more fine-grained discretionary access rights  for
files  and directories.  Every object can be thought of as having
associated with it an ACL that governs the  discretionary  access
to  that object; this ACL is referred to as an access ACL. In ad-
dition, a directory may have an associated ACL that  governs  the
initial  access  ACL  for  objects created within that directory;
this ACL is referred to as a default ACL.  An ACL consists  of  a
set of ACL entries. An ACL entry specifies the access permissions
on  the  associated  object  for an individual user or a group of
users as a combination of read, write and search/execute  permis-
sions.   An ACL entry contains an entry tag type, an optional en-
try tag qualifier, and a set of permissions.   We  use  the  term
qualifier to denote the entry tag qualifier of an ACL entry.  The
qualifier  denotes  the  identifier of a user or a group, for en-
tries with tag types of ACL_USER or ACL_GROUP, respectively.  En-
tries with tag types other than ACL_USER or ACL_GROUP have no de-
fined qualifiers.  The following entry tag types are defined: The
ACL_USER_OBJ  entry  denotes  access  rights  for the file owner.
ACL_USER entries denote access rights for users identified by the
entry's qualifier.  The ACL_GROUP_OBJ entry denotes access rights
for the file group.  ACL_GROUP entries denote access  rights  for
groups  identified  by the entry's qualifier.  The ACL_MASK entry
denotes the maximum access rights that can be granted by  entries
of type ACL_USER, ACL_GROUP_OBJ, or ACL_GROUP.  The ACL_OTHER en-
try  denotes  access  rights  for processes that do not match any
other entry in the ACL.  When an access check is  performed,  the
ACL_USER_OBJ  and  ACL_USER entries are tested against the effec-
tive user ID. The effective group ID, as well as  all  supplemen-
tary group IDs are tested against the ACL_GROUP_OBJ and ACL_GROUP
entries.  A valid ACL contains exactly one entry with each of the
ACL_USER_OBJ,  ACL_GROUP_OBJ,  and  ACL_OTHER  tag types. Entries
with ACL_USER and ACL_GROUP tag types may  appear  zero  or  more
times  in  an  ACL.  An  ACL that contains entries of ACL_USER or
ACL_GROUP tag  types  must  contain  exactly  one  entry  of  the
ACL_MASK  tag  type. If an ACL contains no entries of ACL_USER or
ACL_GROUP tag types, the ACL_MASK entry is optional.  All user ID
qualifiers must be unique among all entries of ACL_USER tag type,
and all group IDs must be unique among all entries  of  ACL_GROUP
tag type.
  The  function  returns  an ACL with zero ACL entries as the de-
fault ACL of a directory, if the directory is not associated with
a default ACL. The function also accepts an ACL with zero ACL en-
tries as a valid default ACL for directories, denoting  that  the
directory  shall  not  be  associated with a default ACL. This is
equivalent to using the function.   The  permissions  defined  by
ACLs are a superset of the permissions specified by the file per-
mission  bits.  There is a correspondence between the file owner,
group, and other permissions and specific ACL entries: the  owner
permissions correspond to the permissions of the ACL_USER_OBJ en-
try. If the ACL has an ACL_MASK entry, the group permissions cor-
respond  to the permissions of the ACL_MASK entry.  Otherwise, if
the ACL has no ACL_MASK entry, the group  permissions  correspond
to the permissions of the ACL_GROUP_OBJ entry.  The other permis-
sions  correspond to the permissions of the ACL_OTHER entry.  The
file owner, group, and other permissions always match the permis-
sions of the corresponding ACL entry. Modification  of  the  file
permission bits results in the modification of the associated ACL
entries,  and  modification  of  these ACL entries results in the
modification of the file permission bits.  The access  ACL  of  a
file object is initialized when the object is created with any of
the  or  functions.  If a default ACL is associated with a direc-
tory, the parameter to the functions creating  file  objects  and
the default ACL of the directory are used to determine the ACL of
the  new  object:  The new object inherits the default ACL of the
containing directory as its access ACL.  The access  ACL  entries
corresponding  to  the  file permission bits are modified so that
they contain no permissions that are not contained in the permis-
sions specified by the parameter.  If no default ACL  is  associ-
ated  with  a  directory, the parameter to the functions creating
file objects and the file creation mask (see are used  to  deter-
mine the ACL of the new object: The new object is assigned an ac-
cess   ACL   containing   entries   of  tag  types  ACL_USER_OBJ,
ACL_GROUP_OBJ, and ACL_OTHER. The permissions  of  these  entries
are  set  to the permissions specified by the file creation mask.
The access ACL entries corresponding to the file permission  bits
are  modified  so  that  they contain no permissions that are not
contained in the  permissions  specified  by  the  parameter.   A
process  may  request  read, write, or execute/search access to a
file object protected by an ACL. The access check  algorithm  de-
termines  whether  access to the object will be granted.  the ef-
fective user ID of the process matches the user ID  of  the  file
object  owner, the ACL_USER_OBJ entry contains the requested per-
missions, access is granted, access  is  denied.   the  effective
user ID of the process matches the qualifier of any entry of type
ACL_USER, the matching ACL_USER entry and the ACL_MASK entry con-
tain  the requested permissions, access is granted, access is de-
nied.  the effective group ID or any of the  supplementary  group
IDs  of  the process match the file group or the qualifier of any
entry of type ACL_GROUP, the ACL contains an ACL_MASK entry,  the
ACL_MASK entry and any of the matching ACL_GROUP_OBJ or ACL_GROUP
entries contain the requested permissions, access is granted, ac-
cess  is  denied.   (note  that there can be no ACL_GROUP entries
without an ACL_MASK entry) the ACL_GROUP_OBJ entry  contains  the
requested  permissions, access is granted, access is denied.  the
ACL_OTHER entry contains the  requested  permissions,  access  is
granted.   access  is  denied.   A long and a short text form for
representing ACLs is defined. In both forms, ACL entries are rep-
resented as three colon separated fields: an ACL entry tag  type,
an ACL entry qualifier, and the discretionary access permissions.
The first field contains one of the following entry tag type key-
words:  A  ACL  entry  specifies the access granted to either the
file owner (entry tag type ACL_USER_OBJ) or a specified user (en-
try tag type ACL_USER).  A ACL entry specifies the access granted
to either the file group (entry  tag  type  ACL_GROUP_OBJ)  or  a
specified  group  (entry tag type ACL_GROUP).  A ACL entry speci-
fies the maximum access which can be granted by any ACL entry ex-
cept the entry for the file owner and the entry (entry  tag  type
ACL_MASK).   An  ACL  entry  specifies  the access granted to any
process that does not match any or ACL entries  (entry  tag  type
ACL_OTHER).   The second field contains the user or group identi-
fier of the user or group associated with the ACL entry  for  en-
tries  of  entry tag type ACL_USER or ACL_GROUP, and is empty for
all other entries. A user identifier can be a user name or a user
ID number in decimal form. A group identifier can be a group name
or a group ID number in decimal form.  The third  field  contains
the   discretionary  access  permissions.  The  read,  write  and
search/execute permissions are represented by the and characters,
in this order. Each of these characters is replaced by the  char-
acter  to  denote  that  a permission is absent in the ACL entry.
When converting from the text form to  the  internal  representa-
tion,  permissions  that are absent need not be specified.  White
space is permitted at the beginning and end of  each  ACL  entry,
and  immediately  before  and  after a field separator (the colon
character).  The long text form contains one ACL entry per  line.
In addition, a number sign may start a comment that extends until
the  end  of the line. If an ACL_USER, ACL_GROUP_OBJ or ACL_GROUP
ACL entry contains permissions that are not also contained in the
ACL_MASK entry, the entry is  followed  by  a  number  sign,  the
string "effective:", and the effective access permissions defined
by  that  entry.  This  is  an  example  of  the  long text form:
user::rw-   user:lisa:rw-            #effective:r--    group::r--
group:toolies:rw-      #effective:r--  mask::r--  other::r--  The
short text form is a sequence of ACL entries separated by commas,
and is used for input. Comments are not supported. Entry tag type
keywords may either appear in their full unabbreviated  form,  or
in  their single letter abbreviated form. The abbreviation for is
the abbreviation for is the abbreviation for is and the abbrevia-
tion for is The permissions may contain at most one each  of  the
following  characters  in  any  order:  These are examples of the
short                         text                          form:
u::rw-,u:lisa:rw-,g::r--,g:toolies:rw-,m::r--,o::r--
g:toolies:rw,u:lisa:rw,u::wr,g::r,o::r,m::r IEEE 1003.1e draft 17
defines  Access  Control  Lists  that include entries of tag type
ACL_MASK, and defines a mapping between file permission bits that
is not constant. The standard working group  defined  this  rela-
tively  complex  interface  in  order to ensure that applications
that are compliant with IEEE 1003.1 ("POSIX.1") will still  func-
tion  as expected on systems with ACLs. The IEEE 1003.1e draft 17
contains the rationale for choosing  this  interface  in  section
B.23.   On  a  system  that supports ACLs, the file utilities and
change their behavior in the following way: For files that have a
default ACL or an access ACL that contains more  than  the  three
required  ACL  entries,  the utility in the long form produced by
displays a plus sign after the permission string.  If the flag is
specified, the utility also preserves ACLs.  If this is not  pos-
sible, a warning is produced.
  The  utility  always preserves ACLs. If this is not possible, a
warning is produced.  The effect of the utility, and of the  sys-
tem  call,  on  the  access  ACL is described in The IEEE 1003.1e
draft 17 ("POSIX.1e") document describes several security  exten-
sions  to the IEEE 1003.1 standard. While the work on 1003.1e has
been abandoned,  many  UNIX  style  systems  implement  parts  of
POSIX.1e  draft  17,  or of earlier drafts.  Linux Access Control
Lists implement the full set of functions and  utilities  defined
for  Access  Control  Lists  in POSIX.1e, and several extensions.
The implementation is fully compliant with POSIX.1e draft 17; ex-
tensions are marked as such.  The Access Control  List  manipula-
tion  functions  are  defined in the ACL library (libacl, -lacl).
The POSIX  compliant  interfaces  are  declared  in  the  header.
Linux-specific  extensions to these functions are declared in the
header.  While ACLs can be used  to  deny  processes  permissions
based on the groups they are in, this is considered bad practice.
Privileged helpers such as can give unprivileged processes access
to the system call, which allows them to drop supplementary group
membership and render restrictions based on that membership inef-
fective.   For  further details, see The first group of functions
is supported on  most  systems  with  POSIX-like  access  control
lists, while the second group is supported on fewer systems.  For
applications  that  will  be  ported  the  second  group  is best
avoided.  These non-portable extensions are  available  on  Linux
systems.  Andreas Gruenbacher, <andreas.gruenbacher@gmail.com>


