groff_out(5)                   File Formats Manual                  groff_out(5)

Name
     groff_out - GNU roff device-independent page description language

Description
     The  fundamental  operation  of  the  GNU troff formatter, troff(1), is the
     translation of the groff(7) input language into a  series  of  instructions
     concerned  primarily  with  placing glyphs or geometric objects at specific
     positions on a rectangular page.  In the  following  discussion,  the  term
     command  refers  to  this  device-independent output language, never to the
     language intended for use by document authors.   Device-independent  output
     commands  comprise  several categories: glyph output; font, color, and text
     size selection; motion of the drawing position; page  advancement;  drawing
     of  geometric  primitives;  and  device extension commands, a catch-all for
     other operations.  The last includes directives to start and  stop  output,
     identify  the intended output device, and embed URL hyperlinks in supported
     output formats.

   Background
     As groff(1) is a wrapper program around GNU troff and  automatically  calls
     an  output  driver, users seldom encounter this format under normal circum-
     stances.  groff offers the option -Z to inhibit  postprocessing  such  that
     GNU troff's output is sent to the standard output stream just as it is when
     running GNU troff directly.

     The  purpose  of device-independent output is to facilitate the development
     of postprocessors by providing a common programming interface for  all  de-
     vices.   It is a distinct, and much simpler, language from that of the for-
     matter, troff.  The device-independent output can be thought of as a  "page
     description language".

     In the following discussion, the term troff output describes what is output
     by  GNU  troff, while page description denotes the language accepted by the
     parser that interprets this output for the  output  drivers.   This  parser
     handles  whitespace  more flexibly than AT&T troff's implementation, recog-
     nizes a GNU extension to the language, and supports a legacy compressed en-
     coding of a subset of commands for compatibility;  otherwise,  the  formats
     are  the  same.   (The parser for device-independent output can be found in
     the groff sources at src/libs/libdriver/input.cpp.)

     When Brian Kernighan designed AT&T troff's device-independent page descrip-
     tion language circa 1980, he had to balance readability and maintainability
     against severe constraints on file size and transmission speed to the  out-
     put  device.   A  decade  later,  when  James Clark wrote groff, these con-
     straints were no longer as tight.

   Syntax
     roff's page description language is a  sequence  of  tokens:  single-letter
     commands  or their arguments.  Some commands accept a subcommand as a first
     argument, followed by one or more further arguments.

     AT&T device-independent troff used whitespace minimally when producing out-
     put.  GNU troff, in contrast, attempts to make its output more  human-read-
     able.  The whitespace characters--tab, space, and newline--are always mean-
     ingful.   They are never used to represent spacing in the document; that is
     done with horizontal (h, H) and vertical (v, V) positioning commands.   Any
     sequence  of  space  and/or tab characters is equivalent to a single space,
     separating commands from arguments and arguments from each other.  Space is
     required only where omitting it would cause ambiguity.  A line break  sepa-
     rates  commands.  The comment character is a pound/hash sign (#), and marks
     the remainder of the line as a comment.  A line comprising only  whitespace
     after comment removal does nothing but separate input tokens.

     For  example, the relative horizontal motion command (h) and the command to
     write one glyph (c), each take a single argument; the former a signed inte-
     ger, and the latter a printable ISO 646/"ASCII"  character.   A  series  of
     such  commands could validly occur without spaces on an input line, but GNU
     troff follows each with a newline.

     Some commands have a more complex syntax; the GNU troff  extension  command
     for  writing  glyph  sequences  (t) accepts a variable number of arguments.
     Those that draw geometric objects (D) or control the device (x) furthermore
     recognize subcommand arguments.  Such commands thus must end  with  a  new-
     line.   In GNU troff, the device extension (sub)command "x X" uniquely sup-
     ports a line continuation syntax; a single input line contains any other.

   Argument units
     Some commands accept integer arguments that represent measurements, but the
     scaling units of the formatter's language are never  used.   Most  commands
     assume  a  scaling  unit  of  "u" (basic units), and others use "s" (scaled
     points).  These are defined by the parameters  specified  in  the  device's
     DESC  file;  see groff_font(5) and, for more on scaling units, groff(7) and
     Groff: The GNU Implementation of troff, the groff Texinfo  manual.   Color-
     related commands use dimensionless integers.

     Note  that  single characters can have the eighth bit set, as can the names
     of fonts and special characters (this is, glyphs).  The names of glyphs and
     fonts can be of arbitrary length.  A glyph that is to be printed  will  al-
     ways be in the current font.

     A  string  argument  is  always terminated by the next whitespace character
     (space, tab, or newline); an embedded # character is regarded  as  part  of
     the  argument, not as the beginning of a comment command.  An integer argu-
     ment is already terminated by the next non-digit character, which  then  is
     regarded as the first character of the next argument or command.

   Output structure
     Device-independent  troff output is organized into three parts: a header, a
     body, and a trailer.

     The task of the header is to set  general  device  parameters.   GNU  troff
     guarantees that its header consists of the following three lines:

            x T device
            x res n h v
            x init

     with  the parameters n, h, and v set as outlined in subsection "Device Con-
     trol Commands" below.  The parser for the device-independent page  descrip-
     tion  language  format  is able to interpret additional whitespace and com-
     ments as well even in the header.

     The body contains the document's visible content.  Once  an  output  driver
     interprets "x init", it prepares to handle commands in general.  Processing
     terminates when a "x stop" command is encountered; the last line of any GNU
     troff page description output always contains such a command.

     Semantically,  the body is page-oriented.  The p command starts a new page.
     Positioning, writing, and drawing commands are performed within a page,  so
     they  cannot  occur  before the first p command.  The output driver reckons
     absolute positioning (by the H and V commands) with respect to the  current
     page's origin at the top left corner, and all other positioning relative to
     the drawing position on the page.

     The trailer advances the drawing position to the bottom of the page and in-
     forms the device that the document (or "job") has ended.

Command reference
     This section describes all page description output commands, both from AT&T
     troff as well as extension commands issued by GNU troff.

   Comment command
     #anything<line-break>
            Apply  comment annotation.  Ignore any characters from the # charac-
            ter up to the next newline.  Each comment can be preceded  by  arbi-
            trary  syntactical  space,  and every command can be terminated by a
            comment.

   Simple commands
     The commands in this subsection have a command code consisting of a  single
     character,  taking  a fixed number of arguments.  Most of them are commands
     for positioning and text writing.  These commands are  smart  about  white-
     space.   Optionally,  syntactical  space can be inserted before, after, and
     between the command letter and its arguments.  All of  these  commands  are
     stackable,  i.e., they can be preceded by other simple commands or followed
     by arbitrary other commands on the same  line.   A  separating  syntactical
     space  is  necessary  only when two integer arguments would clash or if the
     preceding argument ends with a string argument.

     C id<white-space>
            Typeset the glyph of the special character id.  Trailing syntactical
            space is necessary to allow special  character  names  of  arbitrary
            length.  The drawing position is not advanced.

     c c    Typeset the glyph of the ordinary character c.  The drawing position
            is not advanced.

     f n    Select the font mounted at position n.  n cannot be negative.

     H n    Horizontally  move  the  drawing  position to n basic units from the
            left edge of the page.  n cannot be negative.

     h n    Move the drawing position right n basic units.  AT&T  troff  allowed
            negative n; GNU troff does not produce such values, but groff's out-
            put driver library handles them.

     m scheme [component ...]
            Select  the  stroke  color  using  the components in the color space
            scheme.  Each component is an integer  between  0  and  65536.   The
            quantity  of  components  and  their meanings vary with each scheme.
            This command is a groff extension.

            mc cyan magenta yellow
                   Use the CMY color scheme with components cyan,  magenta,  and
                   yellow.

            md     Use the default color (no components; black in most cases).

            mg gray
                   Use a grayscale color scheme with a component ranging between
                   0 (black) and 65536 (white).

            mk cyan magenta yellow black
                   Use the CMYK color scheme with components cyan, magenta, yel-
                   low, and black.

            mr red green blue
                   Use  the  RGB  color  scheme  with components red, green, and
                   blue.

     N n    Typeset the glyph with index n in the current font.  n is normally a
            non-negative integer.  The drawing position is  not  advanced.   The
            html  and  xhtml devices use this command with negative n to produce
            unbreakable space; the absolute value of n is taken and  interpreted
            in basic units.

     n b a  Indicate a break.  No action is performed; the command is present to
            make  the  output more easily parsed.  The integers b and a describe
            the vertical space amounts before and after the break, respectively.
            GNU troff issues this command but groff's output driver library  ig-
            nores it.  See v and V.

     p n    Begin  a  new  page, setting its number to n.  Each page is indepen-
            dent, even from those using the same number.  The  vertical  drawing
            position  is  set  to 0.  All positioning, writing, and drawing com-
            mands are interpreted in the context of a page, so a p command  must
            precede them.

     s n    Set  type size to n scaled points (unit z in GNU troff).  AT&T troff
            used unscaled points (p) instead; see section "Compatibility" below.

     t xyz...<white-space>
     t xyz... dummy-arg<white-space>
            Typeset word xyz; that is, set a sequence of ordinary  glyphs  named
            x,  y,  z, ..., terminated by a space or newline; an optional second
            integer argument is ignored (this allows the formatter  to  generate
            an  even  number  of  arguments).   Each glyph is set at the current
            drawing position, and the position is then advanced horizontally  by
            the  glyph's width.  A glyph's width is read from its metrics in the
            font description file, scaled to the current type size, and  rounded
            to  a  multiple of the horizontal motion quantum.  Use the C command
            to emplace glyphs of special characters.  The t command is  a  groff
            extension  and  is  output only for devices whose DESC file contains
            the tcommand directive; see groff_font(5).

     u n xyz...
     u xyz... dummy-arg<white-space>
            Typeset word xyz with track kerning.  As t, but after  placing  each
            glyph,  the  drawing  position is further advanced horizontally by n
            basic units.  The u command is a groff extension and is output  only
            for  devices  whose  DESC  file contains the tcommand directive; see
            groff_font(5).

     V n    Vertically move the drawing position to n basic units from  the  top
            edge of the page.  n cannot be negative.

     v n    Move  the  drawing  position down n basic units.  AT&T troff allowed
            negative n; GNU troff does not produce such values, but groff's out-
            put driver library handles them.

     w      Indicate an inter-word space.  No action is performed;  the  command
            is  present  to make the output more easily parsed.  Only inter-word
            spaces on an output line (be they breakable or  not)  are  thus  de-
            scribed; those resulting from horizontal motion escape sequences are
            not.   GNU  troff  issues this command but groff's output driver li-
            brary ignores it.  See h and H.

   Graphics commands
     Each graphics or drawing command in the page  description  language  starts
     with  the letter "D", followed by one or two characters that specify a sub-
     command; this is followed by a fixed or variable number  of  integer  argu-
     ments  that  are separated by a single space character.  A "D", command may
     not be followed by another command on the same line (apart from a comment),
     so each "D" command is terminated by a syntactical line break.

     GNU troff output follows AT&T troff's output conventions (no space  between
     command  and subcommand, all arguments are preceded by a single space char-
     acter), but groff's parser allows optional space between the  command  let-
     ters  and  makes  the  space before the first argument optional.  As usual,
     each space can be any sequence of tab and space characters.

     Some graphics commands can take a variable number of  arguments.   In  this
     case, they are integers representing a size measured in basic units u.  The
     h arguments stand for horizontal distances where positive means right, neg-
     ative  left.   The  v arguments stand for vertical distances where positive
     means down, negative up.  All these distances are offsets relative  to  the
     current location.

     Each  graphics  command directly corresponds to a troff \D escape sequence.
     See subsection "Drawing commands" of groff(7).

     Unless indicated otherwise, each graphics command directly corresponds to a
     similar groff \D escape sequence; see groff(7).

     Unknown D commands are assumed to be device-specific.   Its  arguments  are
     parsed as strings; the whole information is then sent to the postprocessor.

     In the following command reference, the syntax element <line-break> means a
     syntactical line break as defined in subsection "Separation" above.

     D~ h1 v1 h2 v2 ... hn vn<line-break>
            Draw B-spline from current position to offset (h1, v1), then to off-
            set  (h2, v2)  if  given, etc., up to (hn, vn). This command takes a
            variable number of argument pairs; the current position is moved  to
            the terminal point of the drawn curve.

     Da h1 v1 h2 v2<line-break>
            Draw  arc  from current position to (h1, v1)+(h2, v2) with center at
            (h1, v1); then move the current position to the final point  of  the
            arc.

     DC d<line-break>
     DC d dummy-arg<line-break>
            Draw  a  solid  circle  using the current fill color with diameter d
            (integer in basic units u) with leftmost point at the current  posi-
            tion;  then  move the current position to the rightmost point of the
            circle.  An optional second integer argument is ignored (this allows
            the formatter to generate an even number of arguments).   This  com-
            mand is a GNU extension.

     Dc d<line-break>
            Draw  circle  line  with  diameter d (integer in basic units u) with
            leftmost point at the current position; then move the current  posi-
            tion to the rightmost point of the circle.

     DE h v<line-break>
            Draw a solid ellipse in the current fill color with a horizontal di-
            ameter  of  h  and  a vertical diameter of v (both integers in basic
            units u) with the leftmost point at the current position; then  move
            to the rightmost point of the ellipse.  This command is a GNU exten-
            sion.

     De h v<line-break>
            Draw  an outlined ellipse with a horizontal diameter of h and a ver-
            tical diameter of v (both integers in basic units u) with the  left-
            most  point at current position; then move to the rightmost point of
            the ellipse.

     DF color-scheme [component ...]<line-break>
            Set fill color for  solid  drawing  objects  using  different  color
            schemes;  the  analogous command for setting the color of text, line
            graphics, and the outline of graphic objects is m.  The color compo-
            nents are specified as integer arguments between 0 and  65536.   The
            number  of color components and their meaning vary for the different
            color schemes.  These commands are generated by GNU  troff's  escape
            sequences  "\D'F ...'" \M (with no other corresponding graphics com-
            mands).  No position changing.  This command is a GNU extension.

            DFc cyan magenta yellow<line-break>
                   Set fill color for solid drawing objects using the CMY  color
                   scheme, having the 3 color components cyan, magenta, and yel-
                   low.

            DFd <line-break>
                   Set  fill color for solid drawing objects to the default fill
                   color value (black in most cases).  No component arguments.

            DFg gray<line-break>
                   Set fill color for solid drawing objects to the shade of gray
                   given by the argument, an integer between 0 (black) and 65536
                   (white).

            DFk cyan magenta yellow black<line-break>
                   Set fill color for solid drawing objects using the CMYK color
                   scheme, having the 4 color components cyan, magenta,  yellow,
                   and black.

            DFr red green blue<line-break>
                   Set  fill color for solid drawing objects using the RGB color
                   scheme, having the 3 color components red, green, and blue.

     Df n<line-break>
            The argument n must be an integer in the range -32767 to 32767.

            0<=n<=1000
                   Set the color for filling solid drawing objects to a shade of
                   gray, where 0 corresponds to solid white, 1000 (the  default)
                   to  solid black, and values in between to intermediate shades
                   of gray; this command is superseded by "DFg".

            n<0 or n>1000
                   Set the filling color to the color that  is  currently  being
                   used  for the text and the outline, see command m.  For exam-
                   ple, the command sequence

                          mg 0 0 65536
                          Df -1

                   sets all colors to blue.

            This command is a GNU extension.

     Dl h v<line-break>
            Draw line from current position to offset (h, v) (integers in  basic
            units u); then set current position to the end of the drawn line.

     Dp h1 v1 h2 v2 ... hn vn<line-break>
            Draw  a  polygon line from current position to offset (h1, v1), from
            there to offset (h2, v2), etc., up  to  offset  (hn, vn),  and  from
            there  back  to  the starting position.  For historical reasons, the
            position is changed by adding the sum of all arguments with odd  in-
            dex to the current horizontal position and the even ones to the ver-
            tical  position.   Although  this  doesn't make sense it is kept for
            compatibility.  This command is a groff extension.

     DP h1 v1 h2 v2 ... hn vn<line-break>
            The same macro as the corresponding Dp command with the  same  argu-
            ments,  but  draws  a solid polygon in the current fill color rather
            than an outlined polygon.  The position is changed in the  same  way
            as with Dp.  This command is a GNU extension.

     Dt n<line-break>
            Set the current line thickness to n (an integer in basic units u) if
            n>0; if n=0 select the smallest available line thickness; otherwise,
            the  line  thickness is made proportional to the type size, which is
            the default.  For historical reasons,  the  horizontal  position  is
            changed  by  adding the argument to the current horizontal position,
            while the vertical position is not changed.  Although  this  doesn't
            make sense, it is kept for compatibility.  This command is a GNU ex-
            tension.

   Device control commands
     Each device control command starts with the letter "x", followed by a space
     character  (optional  or arbitrary space or tab in GNU troff) and a subcom-
     mand letter or word; each argument (if any) must be preceded by a syntacti-
     cal space.  All "x", commands are terminated by a syntactical  line  break;
     no  device  control  command can be followed by another command on the same
     line (except a comment).

     The subcommand is basically a single letter, but to  increase  readability,
     it can be written as a word, i.e., an arbitrary sequence of characters ter-
     minated  by  the  next tab, space, or newline character.  All characters of
     the subcommand word but the first are simply  ignored.   For  example,  GNU
     troff  outputs the initialization command "x i" as "x init" and the resolu-
     tion command "x r" as "x res".

     In the following, the syntax element <line-break> means a syntactical  line
     break as defined in subsection "Separation" above.

     xF name<line-break>
            (Filename control command)
            Use name as the intended name for the current file in error reports.
            This  is  useful  for  remembering the original file name when groff
            uses its internal piping mechanism.  The input file is  not  changed
            by this command.  This command is a GNU extension.

     xf n s<line-break>
            (font control command)
            Mount  font position n (a non-negative integer) with font named s (a
            text word); see groff_font(5).

     xH n<line-break>
            (Height control command)
            Set character height to n (a positive integer in scaled  points  z).
            Classical  troff used the unit points (p) instead; see section "Com-
            patibility" below.

     xi <line-break>
            (init control command)
            Initialize device.  This is the third command of the header.

     xp <line-break>
            (pause control command)
            Parsed but ignored.  The classical documentation reads pause device,
            can be restarted.

     xr n h v<line-break>
            (resolution control command)
            Resolution is n, while h is the minimal horizontal motion, and v the
            minimal vertical motion possible with this device; all arguments are
            positive integers in basic units u per inch.   This  is  the  second
            command of the header.

     xS n<line-break>
            (Slant control command)
            Set slant to n degrees (an integer in basic units u).

     xs <line-break>
            (stop control command)
            Terminates  the  processing  of the current file; issued as the last
            command of device-independent troff output.

     xt <line-break>
            (trailer control command)
            Generate trailer information, if any.  In groff, this  is  currently
            ignored.

     xT xxx<line-break>
            (Typesetter control command)
            Set  the  name of the output driver to xxx, a sequence of non-white-
            space characters terminated by whitespace.  The possible names  cor-
            respond to those of groff's -T option.  This is the first command of
            the header.

     xu n<line-break>
            (underline control command)
            Configure  underlining  of  spaces.  If n is 1, start underlining of
            spaces; if n is 0, stop underlining of spaces.  This is  needed  for
            the cu request in nroff mode and is ignored otherwise.  This command
            is a GNU extension.

     xX anything<line-break>
            (X-escape control command)
            Send  string anything uninterpreted to the device.  If the line fol-
            lowing this command starts with a + character this  line  is  inter-
            preted  as a continuation line in the following sense.  The + is ig-
            nored, but a newline character is sent instead to  the  device,  the
            rest  of  the  line  is sent uninterpreted.  The same applies to all
            following lines until the first character of a line is not a + char-
            acter.  This command is generated by the groff escape  sequence  \X.
            Line continuation is a GNU extension.

   Legacy compressed encoding
     AT&T  troff  primarily emitted glyphs by writing two digits (a motion) fol-
     lowed by a single character corresponding to a glyph.  This syntax is  less
     a command itself than a compressed encoding of the c and h commands.

     ddc    Move right dd (exactly two decimal digits) basic units u, then print
            glyph with single-letter name c.

            In groff, arbitrary syntactical space around and within this command
            is  allowed  to be added.  Only when a preceding command on the same
            line ends with an argument of variable length a separating space  is
            obligatory.   In  classical troff, large clusters of these and other
            commands were used, mostly without spaces; this made such output al-
            most unreadable.

     For modern high-resolution devices, this command is impractical because the
     widths of the glyphs have a greater magnitude in basic units than two deci-
     mal digits can represent.  In groff, it is used only for output to the X75,
     X75-12, X100, and X100-12 devices.  For others, the commands t and  u  pro-
     vide greater functionality and superior troubleshooting capacity.

Compatibility
     The  page  description  language  of  AT&T troff was first documented in "A
     Typesetter-independent TROFF", by Brian Kernighan, and  by  1992  the  AT&T
     troff manual was updated to incorporate a description of it.

     groff's page description language is compatible with this specification ex-
     cept in the following aspects.

     *  AT&T device-independent troff's quasi-device independence is not yet im-
        plemented.

     *  The printing hardware of the early 1980s differed from today's.  groff's
        output  device  names  also differ from those of AT&T troff For example,
        the PostScript device in AT&T troff, post  (implemented  by  the  driver
        command  dpost),  has  a resolution of only 720 units per inch, suitable
        for printers of decades past.  groff's ps device  has  a  resolution  of
        72000  units per inch.  In principle, by implementing a rescaling mecha-
        nism, groff could come to emulate AT&T's post device.

     *  While the B-spline command D~ is reliably interpreted  by  groff's  page
        description language parser, some output drivers don't implement drawing
        routines for it.

     *  In  GNU  troff,  the argument to the commands s and x H uses an implicit
        unit of scaled points z whereas AT&T troff uses spacing points p.   This
        isn't an incompatibility, but a compatible extension, for both units co-
        incide  for  any  device without a sizescale directive in its DESC file,
        including all postprocessors from AT&T and groff's text (nroff-mode) de-
        vices.  groff devices that use sizescale either do not  exist  for  AT&T
        troff have a different name, or seem to have a different resolution.  So
        conflicts are very unlikely.

     *  The  drawing  position  after  the  commands  "Dp",  "DP", and "Dt", are
        processed is illogical.  Since old versions of GNU troff had this  wart,
        we've  retained  it  for compatibility, but may change it in the future.
        Wrap these drawing commands with the \Z escape sequence to both overcome
        the illogical positioning and keep your input working  consistently  re-
        gardless of the wart's presence in the implementation.

     The  differences  between  groff  and  classical  troff  are  documented in
     groff_diff(7).

Files
     /usr/share/groff/1.24.1/font/devname/DESC
            describes the output device name.

Authors
     James Clark wrote an early version of this document, which  described  only
     the  differences  between  AT&T device-independent troff's page description
     language and that of GNU troff.  It has since been expanded and revised  by
     Bernd Warken and G. Branden Robinson.

See also
     Groff:  The GNU Implementation of troff, by Trent A. Fisher and Werner Lem-
     berg, is the primary groff manual.  You can browse  it  interactively  with
     "info groff".

     "Troff  User's  Manual"  by  Joseph  F.  Ossanna, 1976 (revised by Brian W.
     Kernighan, 1992), AT&T Bell Laboratories Computing Science Technical Report
     No. 54, widely called simply "CSTR #54", documents the language, device and
     font description file formats, and device-independent page description lan-
     guage referred to collectively in groff documentation as "AT&T troff".

     "A Typesetter-independent TROFF" by Brian W.  Kernighan,  1982,  AT&T  Bell
     Laboratories  Computing  Science  Technical Report No. 97, (CSTR #97), pro-
     vides additional insights into the device and font description file formats
     and device-independent page description language.

     groff(1)
            documents the -Z option and contains pointers to further groff docu-
            mentation.

     groff(7)
            describes the groff language, including  its  escape  sequences  and
            system of units.

     groff_font(5)
            details the scaling parameters of DESC (device description) files.

     troff(1)
            generates the language documented here.

     roff(7)
            presents  historical  aspects and the general structure of roff sys-
            tems.

     groff_diff(7)
            enumerates differences between the output of AT&T troff and that  of
            GNU troff.

     gxditview(1)
            is a viewer for device-independent troff output.

     Roff.js
            is   a   viewer  for  device-independent  troff  output  written  in
            JavaScript.

     grodvi(1),  grohtml(1),  grolbp(1),  grolj4(1),  gropdf(1),  grops(1),  and
     grotty(1) are groff postprocessors.

groff 1.24.1                       2026-03-15                       groff_out(5)
