The  library reads and writes a variety of streaming archive for-
mats.  Generally speaking, all of these archive  formats  consist
of  a  series  of  Each entry stores a single file system object,
such as a file, directory, or symbolic link.  The following  pro-
vides a brief description of each format supported by libarchive,
with  some information about recognized extensions or limitations
of the current library support.  Note that just because a  format
is  supported  by  libarchive  does not imply that a program that
uses libarchive will support that format.  Applications that  use
libarchive  specify  which  formats  they wish to support, though
many programs do use libarchive convenience functions  to  enable
all  supported  formats.  The library can read most tar archives.
It can write POSIX-standard and formats as well as v7 tar  format
and a subset of the legacy GNU tar format.  All tar formats store
each  entry in one or more 512-byte records.  The first record is
used for file metadata, including filename, timestamp,  and  mode
information,  and  the file data is stored in subsequent records.
Later variants have extended this by either  appropriating  unde-
fined  areas of the header record, extending the header to multi-
ple records, or by storing special entries that modify the inter-
pretation of subsequent entries.  The library can read most  GNU-
format  tar archives.  It currently supports the most popular GNU
extensions, including modern long filename and linkname  support,
as well as atime and ctime data.  The libarchive library does not
support multi-volume archives, nor the old GNU long filename for-
mat.   It  can  read  GNU  sparse file entries, including the new
POSIX-based formats.  The library can write GNU tar  format,  in-
cluding  long filename and linkname support, as well as atime and
ctime data.  The library can read and write  POSIX-compliant  pax
interchange format archives.  Pax interchange format archives are
an extension of the older ustar format that adds a separate entry
with  additional attributes stored as key/value pairs immediately
before each regular entry.  The presence of these additional  en-
tries  is  the only difference between pax interchange format and
the older ustar format.  The extended attributes are of unlimited
length and are stored as UTF-8 Unicode strings.  Keywords defined
in the standard are in all lowercase; vendors are allowed to  de-
fine  custom  keys  by preceding them with the vendor name in all
uppercase.  When writing pax archives, libarchive  uses  many  of
the  SCHILY  keys defined by Joerg Schilling's archiver and a few
LIBARCHIVE keys.  The libarchive library can  read  most  of  the
SCHILY  keys  and most of the GNU keys introduced by GNU tar.  It
silently ignores any keywords that it does not  understand.   The
pax  interchange  format converts filenames to Unicode and stores
them  using  the  UTF-8  encoding.   Prior  to  libarchive   3.0,
libarchive  erroneously  assumed  that  the system wide-character
routines natively supported Unicode.  This caused it to  mis-han-
dle  non-ASCII filenames on systems that did not satisfy this as-
sumption.  The libarchive library can also write pax archives  in
which it attempts to suppress the extended attributes entry when-
ever  possible.   The result will be identical to a ustar archive
unless the extended attributes entry is required to store a  long
file  name, long linkname, extended ACL, file flags, or if any of
the standard ustar data (user name, group name,  UID,  GID,  etc)
cannot  be  fully represented in the ustar header.  In all cases,
the result can be dearchived by any program that can read  POSIX-
compliant  pax  interchange  format archives.  Programs that cor-
rectly read ustar format (see below) will also be  able  to  read
this  format;  any extended attributes will be extracted as sepa-
rate files stored in directories.   The  libarchive  library  can
both  read  and write this format.  This format has the following
limitations: Device major and minor numbers  are  limited  to  21
bits.   Nodes  with  larger  numbers  will  not  be  added to the
archive.  Path names in the archive are  limited  to  255  bytes.
(Shorter  if there is no / character in exactly the right place.)
Symbolic links and hard links are stored in the archive with  the
name  of the referenced file.  This name is limited to 100 bytes.
Extended attributes, file flags, and other extended security  in-
formation cannot be stored.  Archive entries are limited to 8 gi-
gabytes  in  size.  Note that the pax interchange format has none
of these restrictions.  The ustar format is old and  widely  sup-
ported.  It is recommended when compatibility is the primary con-
cern.   The  libarchive  library can read and write the legacy v7
tar format.  This format has the following limitations: Only reg-
ular files, directories, and  symbolic  links  can  be  archived.
Block  and  character  device nodes, FIFOs, and sockets cannot be
archived.  Path names in the archive are limited  to  100  bytes.
Symbolic  links and hard links are stored in the archive with the
name of the referenced file.  This name is limited to 100  bytes.
User and group information are stored as numeric IDs; there is no
provision  for storing user or group names.  Extended attributes,
file flags, and other extended  security  information  cannot  be
stored.   Archive  entries  are  limited  to 8 gigabytes in size.
Generally, users should prefer the ustar format  for  portability
as  the v7 tar format is both less useful and less portable.  The
libarchive library also reads a variety of  commonly-used  exten-
sions  to  the basic tar format.  These extensions are recognized
automatically whenever they appear.  The POSIX standards  require
fixed-length numeric fields to be written with some character po-
sition  reserved for terminators.  Libarchive allows these fields
to be written without terminator characters.   This  extends  the
allowable  range;  in particular, ustar archives with this exten-
sion can support entries up to 64 gigabytes in size.   Libarchive
also recognizes base-256 values in most numeric fields.  This es-
sentially  removes  all  limitations  on  file size, modification
time, and device numbers.  Libarchive recognizes ACL and extended
attribute records written by Solaris tar.  The first tar  program
appeared  in  Seventh  Edition  Unix in 1979.  The first official
standard for the tar file format was the (Unix Standard Tar) for-
mat defined by POSIX in 1988.  POSIX.1-2001  extended  the  ustar
format to create the format.  The libarchive library can read and
write  a  number  of common cpio variants.  A cpio archive stores
each entry as a fixed-size header followed by  a  variable-length
filename  and  variable-length  data.  Unlike the tar format, the
cpio format does only minimal padding of the header or file data.
There are several cpio variants, which differ  primarily  in  how
they  store the initial header: some store the values as octal or
hexadecimal numbers in ASCII, others as binary values of  varying
byte  order  and  length.   The  libarchive library transparently
reads both big-endian and little-endian variants of the  the  two
binary  cpio  formats;  the  original  one from PWB/UNIX, and the
later, more widely used, variant.  This format used 32-bit binary
values for file size and mtime, and 16-bit binary values for  the
other fields.  The formats support only the file types present in
UNIX at the time of their creation.  File sizes are limited to 24
bits in the PWB format, because of the limits of the file system,
and  to  31  bits in the newer binary format, where signed 32 bit
longs were used.  This is the POSIX standardized format, which is
officially known as the or the  and  sometimes  unofficially  re-
ferred  to as the This format stores the header contents as octal
values in ASCII.  It is standard, portable, and immune from byte-
order confusion.  File sizes and mtime are  limited  to  33  bits
(8GB  file  size),  other  fields  are  limited  to 18 bits.  The
libarchive library can read both CRC and non-CRC variants of this
format.  The SVR4 format uses eight-digit hexadecimal values  for
all header fields.  This limits file size to 4GB, and also limits
the  mtime  and other fields to 32 bits.  The SVR4 format can op-
tionally include a CRC of the file contents, although  libarchive
does  not  currently  verify  this  CRC.   Cpio first appeared in
PWB/UNIX 1.0, which was released within AT&T in  1977.   PWB/UNIX
1.0 formed the basis of System III Unix, released outside of AT&T
in  1981.   This makes cpio older than tar, although cpio was not
included in Version 7 AT&T Unix.  As a result,  the  tar  command
became much better known in universities and research groups that
used  Version  7.   The combination of the and utilities provided
very precise control over  file  selection.   Unfortunately,  the
format  has  many  limitations  that make it unsuitable for wide-
spread use.  Only the POSIX format permits files  over  4GB,  and
its  18-bit  limit  for most other fields makes it unsuitable for
modern systems.  In addition, cpio  formats  only  store  numeric
UID/GID values (not usernames and group names), which can make it
very difficult to correctly transfer archives across systems with
dissimilar  user  numbering.  A is a shell script that, when exe-
cuted on a POSIX-compliant system, will recreate a collection  of
file  system  objects.  The libarchive library can write two dif-
ferent kinds of shar archives: The traditional shar format uses a
limited set of POSIX commands, including and It is  suitable  for
portably  archiving  small collections of plain text files.  How-
ever, it is not generally well-suited for  large  archives  (many
implementations  of  have  limits  on  the  size of a script) nor
should it be used with non-text files.  This format is similar to
shar but encodes files using so that the result will be  a  plain
text  file regardless of the file contents.  It also includes ad-
ditional shell commands that attempt to reproduce  as  many  file
attributes  as  possible,  including owner, mode, and flags.  The
additional commands used to restore file attributes make shardump
archives less portable than plain shar archives.  Libarchive  can
read  and  extract  from files containing ISO9660-compliant CDROM
images.  In many cases, this can remove the need to burn a physi-
cal CDROM just in order to read the files contained in an ISO9660
image.  It also avoids security and complexity issues  that  come
with  virtual  mounts  and loopback devices.  Libarchive supports
the most common Rockridge extensions and has partial support  for
Joliet  extensions.   If  both extensions are present, the Joliet
extensions will be used and the Rockridge extensions will be  ig-
nored.   In  particular,  this can create problems with hardlinks
and symlinks, which are supported by Rockridge but not by Joliet.
Libarchive reads ISO9660 images using a streaming strategy.  This
allows it to read compressed images  directly  (decompressing  on
the fly) and allows it to read images directly from network sock-
ets,  pipes,  and other non-seekable data sources.  This strategy
works well for optimized ISO9660 images created by  many  popular
programs.  Such programs collect all directory information at the
beginning  of the ISO9660 image so it can be read from a physical
disk with a minimum of seeking.  However, not all ISO9660  images
can  be  read in this fashion.  Libarchive can also write ISO9660
images.  Such images are fully optimized with the  directory  in-
formation  preceding  all file data.  This is done by storing all
file data to a temporary file while collecting directory informa-
tion in memory.  When the image is  finished,  libarchive  writes
out the directory structure followed by the file data.  The loca-
tion  used for the temporary file can be changed by the usual en-
vironment variables.  Libarchive can read and  write  zip  format
archives  that  have  uncompressed entries and entries compressed
with the , , , and algorithms.  Libarchive can also read, but not
write, zip format archives that have entries compressed with  the
algorithm.   Other  zip compression algorithms are not supported.
The extensions supported by libarchive  are  Zip64,  Libarchive's
extensions  to  better support streaming, PKZIP's traditional ZIP
encryption, Info-ZIP's Unix extra fields, extra time, and Unicode
path, as well as WinZIP's AES encryption.   It  can  extract  jar
archives,  __MACOSX  resource forks extension for OS X, and self-
extracting zip archives.  Libarchive can use either of  two  dif-
ferent  strategies for reading Zip archives: a streaming strategy
which is fast and can handle  extremely  large  archives,  and  a
seeking  strategy which can correctly process self-extracting Zip
archives and archives with deleted members or other in-place mod-
ifications.  The streaming reader processes Zip archives as  they
are  read.   It  can read archives of arbitrary size from tape or
network sockets, and can decode Zip archives that have been sepa-
rately  compressed  or  encoded.   However,  self-extracting  Zip
archives  and archives with certain types of modifications cannot
be correctly handled.  Such  archives  require  that  the  reader
first  process the Central Directory, which is ordinarily located
at the end of a Zip archive  and  is  thus  inaccessible  to  the
streaming  reader.   If  the program using libarchive has enabled
seek support, then libarchive will use this to processes the cen-
tral directory first.  In particular, the seeking reader must  be
used to correctly handle self-extracting archives.  Such archives
consist  of  a  program  followed  by a regular Zip archive.  The
streaming reader cannot parse the initial  program  portion,  but
the  seeking  reader starts by reading the Central Directory from
the end of the archive.  Similarly, Zip archives that  have  been
modified  in-place can have deleted entries or other garbage data
that can only be accurately detected by first reading the Central
Directory.  The Unix archive  format  (commonly  created  by  the
archiver) is a general-purpose format which is used almost exclu-
sively for object files to be read by the link editor The ar for-
mat  has never been standardised.  There are two common variants:
the GNU format derived from SVR4, and the BSD format, which first
appeared in 4.4BSD.  The two differ primarily in  their  handling
of  filenames  longer  than  15  characters: the GNU/SVR4 variant
writes a filename table at the beginning of the archive; the  BSD
format stores each long filename in an extension area adjacent to
the  entry.   Libarchive  can  read  both  extensions,  including
archives that may include both types of long filenames.  Programs
using libarchive can write GNU/SVR4 format if they provide an en-
try called containing a filename table to  be  written  into  the
archive  before  any of the entries.  Any entries whose names are
not in the filename table will be written  using  BSD-style  long
filenames.   This  can cause problems for programs such as GNU ld
that do not support the BSD-style long filenames.  Libarchive can
read and write files in  format.   This  format  is  not  a  true
archive  format, but rather a textual description of a file hier-
archy in which each line specifies the name of a  file  and  pro-
vides specific metadata about that file.  Libarchive can read all
of the keywords supported by both the NetBSD and FreeBSD versions
of although many of the keywords cannot currently be stored in an
object.   When  writing, libarchive supports use of the interface
to specify which keywords should be included in the  output.   If
libarchive was compiled with access to suitable cryptographic li-
braries  (such as the OpenSSL libraries), it can compute hash en-
tries such as or from  file  data  being  written  to  the  mtree
writer.   When  reading an mtree file, libarchive will locate the
corresponding files on disk using the keyword if present  or  the
regular filename.  If it can locate and open the file on disk, it
will  use  that  to fill in any metadata that is missing from the
mtree file and will read the file contents and  return  those  to
the  program  using libarchive.  If it cannot locate and open the
file on disk, libarchive will return an error for any attempt  to
read  the entry body.  Libarchive can read and write 7-Zip format
archives.  TODO: Need more information Libarchive  can  read  Mi-
crosoft  Cabinet ( format archives.  TODO: Need more information.
TODO: Information about libarchive's LHA support  Libarchive  has
limited  support  for  reading  RAR  format archives.  Currently,
libarchive can read RARv3 format archives which have been  either
created  uncompressed, or compressed using any of the compression
methods supported by the RARv3 format.  Libarchive can also  read
self-extracting  RAR  archives.   Libarchive  can  read and write
TODO: Need more information Libarchive can read and write the XAR
format used by many Apple tools.  TODO: Need more information


