Starting  with  version 1.8, supports a plugin API for policy and
session logging.  Plugins may be compiled as dynamic  shared  ob-
jects (the default on systems that support them) or compiled sta-
tically  into the binary itself.  By default, the plugin provides
audit, security policy and I/O  logging  capabilities.   Via  the
plugin  API,  can be configured to use alternate plugins provided
by third parties.  The plugins to be used are  specified  in  the
file.   The  API is versioned with a major and minor number.  The
minor version number is incremented when additions are made.  The
major number is incremented when incompatible changes  are  made.
A  plugin  should be check the version passed to it and make sure
that the major version matches.  The plugin API is defined by the
header file.  A policy plugin must declare and populate a in  the
global  scope.  This structure contains pointers to the functions
that implement the policy checks.  The name of the symbol  should
be  specified in along with a path to the plugin so that can load
it.  struct policy_plugin { #define SUDO_POLICY_PLUGIN     1
    unsigned int type; /* always SUDO_POLICY_PLUGIN */
    unsigned int version; /* always SUDO_API_VERSION */
    int (*open)(unsigned int version, sudo_conv_t conversation,
        sudo_printf_t  sudo_plugin_printf,  char  *  const   set-
tings[],
        char * const user_info[], char * const user_env[],
        char * const plugin_options[], const char **errstr);
    void (*close)(int exit_status, int error);
    int (*show_version)(int verbose);
    int (*check_policy)(int argc, char * const argv[],
        char *env_add[], char **command_info[],
        char  **argv_out[],  char  **user_env_out[],  const  char
**errstr);
    int (*list)(int argc, char * const argv[], int verbose,
        const char *user, const char **errstr);
    int (*validate)(const char **errstr);
    void (*invalidate)(int rmcred);
    int (*init_session)(struct passwd *pwd, char **user_env[],
        const char **errstr);
    void (*register_hooks)(int version,
       int (*register_hook)(struct sudo_hook *hook));
    void (*deregister_hooks)(int version,
       int (*deregister_hook)(struct sudo_hook *hook));
    struct sudo_plugin_event * (*event_alloc)(void); }; A has the
following fields: The field should always  be  set  to  SUDO_POL-
ICY_PLUGIN.   The field should be set to This allows to determine
the API version the plugin was built  against.   int  (*open)(un-
signed int version, sudo_conv_t conversation,
    sudo_printf_t sudo_plugin_printf, char * const settings[],
    char * const user_info[], char * const user_env[],
    char  * const plugin_options[], const char **errstr); Returns
1 on success, 0 on failure, -1 if a general error occurred, or -2
if there was a usage error.  In the latter case, will print a us-
age message before it exits.  If an error occurs, the plugin  may
optionally  call the or function with to present additional error
information to the user.  The function arguments are as  follows:
The version passed in by allows the plugin to determine the major
and minor version number of the plugin API supported by A pointer
to  the  function that can be used by the plugin to interact with
the user (see for details).  Returns 0 on success and -1 on fail-
ure.  A pointer to a function that may be used to display  infor-
mational or error messages (see for details).  Returns the number
of  characters printed on success and -1 on failure.  A vector of
user-supplied settings in the form of  strings.   The  vector  is
terminated  by  a  pointer.  These settings correspond to options
the user specified when  running  As  such,  they  will  only  be
present  when  the corresponding option has been specified on the
command line.  When parsing the plugin should split on the  equal
sign since the field will never include one itself but the might.
The following values may be set by Authentication type, if speci-
fied  by  the  option,  to use on systems where authentication is
supported.  If specified, the user has requested via  the  option
that  close all files descriptors with a value of or higher.  The
plugin may optionally pass this, or another value,  back  in  the
list.   The  root directory (see to run the command in, as speci-
fied by the user via the option.  The plugin may  ignore  or  re-
strict  the user's ability to specify a new root directory.  Only
available starting with API version 1.16.  The working  directory
to  run  the command in, as specified by the user via the option.
The plugin may ignore or restrict the user's ability to specify a
new working directory.  Only available starting with API  version
1.16.   A  debug  file path name followed by a space and a comma-
separated list of debug flags that correspond to the plugin's en-
try in if there is one.  The flags are passed to the  plugin  ex-
actly  as they appear in The syntax used by and the plugin is but
a plugin is free to use a different format so long as it does not
include a comma Prior to 1.8.12, there was no way to specify plu-
gin-specific so the value was always the same as that used by the
front-end and did not include a path name, only the  flags  them-
selves.   As  of  version  1.7 of the plugin interface, will only
pass if contains a plugin-specific entry.  Set  to  true  if  the
user  specified  the option along with a command, indicating that
the user wishes to ignore any cached authentication  credentials.
to  true.   This allows with no arguments to be used similarly to
If the plugin does not to support this usage,  it  may  return  a
value  of -2 from the function, which will cause to print a usage
message and exit.  If the user does not specify a program on  the
command  line,  will pass the plugin the path to the user's shell
and set Indicates whether or not the  system  supports  intercept
mode  using  This  is  currently only true for Linux systems that
support filtering and the action.  Other systems will use  a  dy-
namic  shared  object  to  implement  intercept.   Only available
starting with API version 1.19.  Indicates  whether  or  not  the
system  supports running set-user-ID and set-group-ID binaries in
intercept mode.  This is currently only true  for  Linux  systems
that support filtering and the action.  On systems that use a dy-
namic  shared  object  to implement intercept, the dynamic linker
(ld.so or the equivalent) will disable preloading of  shared  ob-
jects  when executing a set-user-ID or set-group-ID binary.  This
will disable intercept mode for that program and any  other  pro-
grams  that it executes.  The policy plugin may refuse to execute
a set-user-ID or set-group-ID binary in intercept mode  to  avoid
this.   Only  available  starting  with  API version 1.19.  login
class to use when setting resource  limits  and  nice  value,  if
specified  by  the option.  Set to true if the user specified the
option, indicating that the user wishes to  run  a  login  shell.
The  maximum  number  of  groups a user may belong to.  This will
only be present if there is a corresponding setting in  A  space-
separated  list  of IP network addresses and netmasks in the form
e.g., The address and netmask pairs may be either IPv4  or  IPv6,
depending  on what the operating system supports.  If the address
contains a colon it is an IPv6 address, else it is IPv4.  Set  to
true if the user specified the option, indicating that should op-
erate  in  non-interactive mode.  The plugin may reject a command
run in non-interactive mode if user interaction is required.  The
default plugin directory used by the front-end.  This is the  de-
fault directory set at compile time and may not correspond to the
directory  the running plugin was loaded from.  It may be used by
a plugin to locate support files.  The path name of plugin loaded
by the front-end.  The path name will be a fully-qualified unless
the plugin was statically compiled into Set to true if  the  user
specified the option, indicating that the user wishes to preserve
the  environment.   Set to true if the user specified the option,
indicating that the user wishes to preserve the group vector  in-
stead  of  setting  it based on the runas user.  The command name
that sudo was run as, typically or The prompt  to  use  when  re-
questing  a  password,  if specified via the option.  The name of
the remote host to run the command on, if specified via  the  op-
tion.   Support for running the command on a remote host is meant
to be implemented via a helper program that is executed in  place
of  the user-specified command.  The front-end is only capable of
executing commands on the local host.   Only  available  starting
with  API version 1.4.  Set to true if the user specified the op-
tion, indicating that the user wishes to run a shell.  The  group
name  or group-ID to run the command as, if specified via the op-
tion.  The user name or user-ID to run the command as, if  speci-
fied via the option.  SELinux role to use when executing the com-
mand,  if specified by the option.  SELinux type to use when exe-
cuting the command, if specified by the option.  Set to  true  if
the  user  specified  the  option.   If true, set the environment
variable to the target user's home directory.  Set to  true  when
the option is specified or if invoked as The plugin shall substi-
tute an editor into in the function or return -2 with a usage er-
ror  if the plugin does not support For more information, see the
section.  Command timeout specified by the user via  the  option.
Not  all  plugins support command timeouts and the ability of the
user to set a timeout may be restricted by policy.  The format of
the timeout string is plugin-specific.  Set to false if the  user
specified  the  option,  indicating that the user wishes to avoid
updating any cached authentication credentials.   Only  available
starting with API version 1.20.  Additional settings may be added
in  the future so the plugin should silently ignore settings that
it does not recognize.  A vector of information  about  the  user
running the command in the form of strings.  The vector is termi-
nated  by a pointer.  When parsing the plugin should split on the
equal sign since the field will never include one itself but  the
might.   The following values may be set by The number of columns
the user's terminal supports.  If there  is  no  terminal  device
available,  a  default  value  of 80 is used.  The user's current
working directory.  The effective group-ID of the  user  invoking
The  effective  user-ID of the user invoking The real group-ID of
the user invoking The user's supplementary group  list  formatted
as  a  string  of comma-separated group-IDs.  The local machine's
hostname as returned by the system call.  The number of lines the
user's terminal supports.  If there is no terminal device  avail-
able, a default value of 24 is used.  The ID of the process group
that the running process is a member of.  Only available starting
with  API  version  1.2.   The process ID of the running process.
Only available starting with API version 1.2.  The parent process
ID of the running process.  Only available starting with API ver-
sion 1.2.  The maximum size to which the process's address  space
may  grow  (in bytes), if supported by the operating system.  The
soft and hard limits are separated by a comma.  A value of  indi-
cates  that  there is no limit.  Only available starting with API
version 1.16.  The largest size core dump file that may  be  cre-
ated  (in  bytes).   The  soft and hard limits are separated by a
comma.  A value of indicates that there is no limit.  Only avail-
able starting with API version 1.16.  The maximum amount  of  CPU
time  that  the  process may use (in seconds).  The soft and hard
limits are separated by a comma.  A value of indicates that there
is no limit.  Only available starting with API version 1.16.  The
maximum size of the data segment for the process (in bytes).  The
soft and hard limits are separated by a comma.  A value of  indi-
cates  that  there is no limit.  Only available starting with API
version 1.16.  The largest size file that the process may  create
(in  bytes).   The soft and hard limits are separated by a comma.
A value of indicates that there  is  no  limit.   Only  available
starting with API version 1.16.  The maximum number of locks that
the  process may establish, if supported by the operating system.
The soft and hard limits are separated by a comma.   A  value  of
indicates  that  there is no limit.  Only available starting with
API version 1.16.  The maximum size that the process may lock  in
memory  (in  bytes),  if  supported by the operating system.  The
soft and hard limits are separated by a comma.  A value of  indi-
cates  that  there is no limit.  Only available starting with API
version 1.16.  The maximum number of files that the  process  may
have open.  The soft and hard limits are separated by a comma.  A
value of indicates that there is no limit.  Only available start-
ing  with API version 1.16.  The maximum number of processes that
the user may run simultaneously.  The soft and  hard  limits  are
separated  by  a  comma.   A  value of indicates that there is no
limit.  Only available starting with API version 1.16.  The maxi-
mum size to which the process's resident set size  may  grow  (in
bytes).   The  soft  and hard limits are separated by a comma.  A
value of indicates that there is no limit.  Only available start-
ing with API  version  1.16.   The  maximum  size  to  which  the
process's  stack  may  grow (in bytes).  The soft and hard limits
are separated by a comma.  A value of indicates that there is  no
limit.   Only available starting with API version 1.16.  The ses-
sion ID of the running process or 0 if is not part of a POSIX job
control session.  Only available starting with API  version  1.2.
The ID of the foreground process group associated with the termi-
nal device associated with the process or 0 if there is no termi-
nal  present.  Only available starting with API version 1.2.  The
path to the user's terminal device, if one exists.  This entry is
only present if the user has a terminal  device  associated  with
the  session.   The  number of the user's terminal device, if one
exists, formatted as a value.  This entry is only present if  the
user  has  a  terminal  device associated with the session.  Only
available starting with API version 1.22.  The  real  user-ID  of
the  user  invoking The invoking user's file creation mask.  Only
available starting with API version 1.10.  The name of  the  user
invoking  The  user's environment in the form of a strings.  When
parsing the plugin should split on the equal sign since the field
will never include one itself but the might.   Any  (non-comment)
strings immediately after the plugin path are passed as arguments
to the plugin.  These arguments are split on a white space bound-
ary  and  are  passed  to  the  plugin  in the form of a array of
strings.  If no arguments were specified, will  be  the  pointer.
The parameter is only available starting with API version 1.2.  A
plugin  check  the  API version specified by the front-end before
using Failure to do so may result in a crash.   If  the  function
returns  a value other than 1, the plugin may store a message de-
scribing the failure or error in The  front-end  will  then  pass
this value to any registered audit plugins.  The string stored in
must remain valid until the plugin's function is called.  The pa-
rameter is only available starting with API version 1.15.  A plu-
gin check the API version specified by the front-end before using
Failure  to  do  so  may  result  in  a crash.  void (*close)(int
exit_status, int error); The function is called when is finished,
shortly before it exits.  Starting  with  API  version  1.15,  is
called  regardless  of whether or not a command was actually exe-
cuted.  This makes it possible for  plugins  to  perform  cleanup
even  when  a  command  was  not run.  It is not possible to tell
whether a command was run based solely on the arguments passed to
the function.  To determine if a command was  actually  run,  the
plugin  must  keep  track of whether or not the function returned
successfully.  The function arguments are as  follows:  The  com-
mand's exit status, as returned by the system call, or zero if no
command  was  run.  The value of is undefined if is non-zero.  If
the command could not be executed, this is set to  the  value  of
set by the system call.  The plugin is responsible for displaying
error  information  via the or function.  If the command was suc-
cessfully executed, the value of is zero.  If no function is  de-
fined, no I/O logging plugins are loaded, and neither the nor op-
tions  are set in the list, the front-end may execute the command
directly  instead  of  running  it  as  a  child  process.    int
(*show_version)(int  verbose); The function is called by when the
user specifies the option.  The plugin may  display  its  version
information to the user via the or function using If the user re-
quests  detailed  version information, the flag will be non-zero.
Returns 1 on success, 0 on failure, -1 if  a  general  error  oc-
curred,  or  -2  if  there was a usage error, although the return
value is currently ignored.  int (*check_policy)(int argc, char *
const argv[], char *env_add[],
    char    **command_info[],     char     **argv_out[],     char
**user_env_out[],
    const  char **errstr); The function is called by to determine
whether the user is allowed to run the  specified  commands.   If
the  option  was enabled in the array passed to the function, the
user has requested mode.  is a mechanism for editing one or  more
files  where an editor is run with the user's credentials instead
of with elevated privileges.  achieves  this  by  creating  user-
writable  temporary  copies  of  the  files to be edited and then
overwriting the originals with the temporary copies after editing
is complete.  If the plugin supports it must  set  in  the  list.
The plugin is responsible for choosing the editor to be used, po-
tentially  from a variable in the user's environment, such as and
should be stored in (environment variables  may  include  command
line  options).   The files to be edited should be copied from to
separated from the editor and its arguments by  a  element.   The
will be removed by before the editor is executed.  The plugin may
also  set  to  the number of files to be edited in the list; this
will only be used by the  front-end  starting  with  API  version
1.21.  The function returns 1 if the command is allowed, 0 if not
allowed,  -1  for  a general error, or -2 for a usage error or if
was specified but is unsupported by the plugin.   In  the  latter
case,  will  print  a usage message before it exits.  If an error
occurs, the plugin may optionally call the or  function  with  to
present  additional  error information to the user.  The function
arguments are as follows: The number of elements in not  counting
the  final  pointer.   The argument vector describing the command
the user wishes to run, in the same form as what would be  passed
to  the system call.  The vector is terminated by a pointer.  Ad-
ditional environment variables specified by the user on the  com-
mand line in the form of a vector of strings.  The plugin may re-
ject  the  command if one or more variables are not allowed to be
set, or it may silently ignore such variables.  When parsing  the
plugin  should split on the equal sign since the field will never
include one itself but the might.  Information about the  command
being  run  in  the form of strings.  These values are used by to
set the execution environment when running a command.  The plugin
is responsible for creating and populating the vector, which must
be terminated with a pointer.  The following  values  are  recog-
nized  by  AppArmor  profile  to transition to when executing the
command.  Only available starting with  API  version  1.19.   The
root  directory  to  use when running the command.  If specified,
will close all files descriptors  with  a  value  of  or  higher.
Fully  qualified path to the command to be executed.  The current
working directory to change to when executing the command.  If is
unable to change to the new working directory, the  command  will
not be run unless is also set (see below).  If set, will treat an
inability  to  change to the new working directory as a non-fatal
error.  This setting has no effect unless is also  set.   By  de-
fault, runs a command as the foreground process as long as itself
is running in the foreground.  When is enabled and the command is
being  run  in  a pseudo-terminal (due to I/O logging or the set-
ting), the command will be run as a background process.  Attempts
to read from the controlling terminal (or to change terminal set-
tings) will result in the command being suspended with the signal
(or in the case of terminal settings).  If this happens when is a
foreground process, the command will be granted  the  controlling
terminal  and resumed in the foreground with no user intervention
required.  The advantage of initially running the command in  the
background  is  that  need  not read from the terminal unless the
command explicitly requests it.  Otherwise,  any  terminal  input
must  be passed to the command, whether it has required it or not
(the kernel buffers terminals so  it  is  not  possible  to  tell
whether  the  command really wants the input).  This is different
from historic behavior or when the command is not being run in  a
pseudo-terminal.  For this to work seamlessly, the operating sys-
tem  must  support the automatic restarting of system calls.  Un-
fortunately, not all operating systems do this  by  default,  and
even  those  that  do may have bugs.  For example, macOS fails to
restart the and system calls (this is a bug in macOS).   Further-
more,  because this behavior depends on the command stopping with
the or signals, programs that catch  these  signals  and  suspend
themselves with a different signal (usually will not be automati-
cally  foregrounded.   Some  versions of the linux command behave
this way.  Because of this, a plugin should not set unless it  is
explicitly enabled by the administrator and there should be a way
to  enabled  or  disable it on a per-command basis.  This setting
has no effect unless I/O logging is enabled or  is  enabled.   If
specified,  will  use  the system call to execute the command in-
stead of The specified must refer to an open file descriptor.  If
set, will intercept attempts to execute a subsequent command  and
perform a policy check via the policy plugin's function to deter-
mine  whether  or not the command is permitted.  This can be used
to prevent shell escapes on supported platforms but it has a num-
ber of limitations.  See in for details.  Only available starting
with API version 1.18.  If set, will attempt  to  verify  that  a
command run in intercept mode has the expected path name, command
line  arguments  and environment.  This setting has no effect un-
less is also enabled.  Only available starting with  API  version
1.20.   Set  to  true  if the I/O logging plugins, if any, should
compress the log data.  This is a hint to the I/O logging  plugin
which  may  choose  to  ignore it.  The group that will own newly
created I/O log files and directories.  This is a hint to the I/O
logging plugin which may choose to ignore it.  The  file  permis-
sion  mode  to  use  when creating I/O log files and directories.
This is a hint to the I/O logging plugin which may choose to  ig-
nore  it.  The user that will own newly created I/O log files and
directories.  This is a hint to the I/O logging plugin which  may
choose  to ignore it.  Fully qualified path to the file or direc-
tory in which I/O log is to be stored.  This is a hint to the I/O
logging plugin which may choose to ignore it.  If no I/O  logging
plugin is loaded, this setting has no effect.  Set to true if the
I/O  logging plugins, if any, should log the standard input if it
is not connected to a terminal device.  This is a hint to the I/O
logging plugin which may choose to ignore it.  Set to true if the
I/O logging plugins, if any, should log the standard output if it
is not connected to a terminal device.  This is a hint to the I/O
logging plugin which may choose to ignore it.  Set to true if the
I/O logging plugins, if any, should log the standard error if  it
is not connected to a terminal device.  This is a hint to the I/O
logging plugin which may choose to ignore it.  Set to true if the
I/O logging plugins, if any, should log all terminal input.  This
only  includes  input  typed  by  the user and not from a pipe or
redirected from a file.  This is a hint to the I/O logging plugin
which may choose to ignore it.  Set to true if  the  I/O  logging
plugins,  if  any, should log all terminal output.  This only in-
cludes output to the screen, not output to a pipe or file.   This
is  a  hint  to the I/O logging plugin which may choose to ignore
it.  login class to use when setting  resource  limits  and  nice
value  (optional).   This option is only set on systems that sup-
port login classes.  Nice value (priority) to use when  executing
the  command.  The nice value, if specified, overrides the prior-
ity associated with the on systems.  If set, will call the  audit
plugin's  function to log when the command runs a subsequent com-
mand, if supported by the system.  If is also specified, will  be
ignored.   See  in for more information.  Only available starting
with API version 1.18.  If set, prevent the command from  execut-
ing  other  programs.  A comma-separated list of file descriptors
that should be preserved, regardless of the value of the setting.
Only available starting with API version 1.5.  If set, will  pre-
serve  the  user's group vector instead of initializing the group
vector based on The maximum size to which the  process's  address
space  may grow (in bytes), if supported by the operating system.
The soft and hard limits are separated by a  comma.   If  only  a
single value is specified, both the hard and soft limits are set.
A  value  of  indicates  that there is no limit.  A value of will
cause the invoking user's resource  limit  to  be  preserved.   A
value  of  will cause the target user's default resource limit to
be used on systems that allow per-user resource limits to be con-
figured.  Only available starting with  API  version  1.18.   The
largest  size core dump file that may be created (in bytes).  The
soft and hard limits are separated by a comma.  If only a  single
value  is  specified,  both  the hard and soft limits are set.  A
value of indicates that there is no limit.  A value of will cause
the invoking user's resource limit to be preserved.  A  value  of
will cause the target user's default resource limit to be used on
systems  that  allow  per-user  resource limits to be configured.
Only available starting  with  API  version  1.18.   The  maximum
amount  of  CPU  time that the process may use (in seconds).  The
soft and hard limits are separated by a comma.  If only a  single
value  is  specified,  both  the hard and soft limits are set.  A
value of indicates that there is no limit.  A value of will cause
the invoking user's resource limit to be preserved.  A  value  of
will cause the target user's default resource limit to be used on
systems  that  allow  per-user  resource limits to be configured.
Only available starting with API version 1.18.  The maximum  size
of  the  data  segment  for the process (in bytes).  The soft and
hard limits are separated by a comma.  If only a single value  is
specified, both the hard and soft limits are set.  A value of in-
dicates that there is no limit.  A value of will cause the invok-
ing user's resource limit to be preserved.  A value of will cause
the  target  user's  default resource limit to be used on systems
that allow per-user  resource  limits  to  be  configured.   Only
available  starting with API version 1.18.  The largest size file
that the process may create (in bytes).  The soft and hard limits
are separated by a comma.  If only a single value  is  specified,
both the hard and soft limits are set.  A value of indicates that
there is no limit.  A value of will cause the invoking user's re-
source  limit  to be preserved.  A value of will cause the target
user's default resource limit to be used on  systems  that  allow
per-user resource limits to be configured.  Only available start-
ing  with API version 1.18.  The maximum number of locks that the
process may establish, if supported by the operating system.  The
soft and hard limits are separated by a comma.  If only a  single
value  is  specified,  both  the hard and soft limits are set.  A
value of indicates that there is no limit.  A value of will cause
the invoking user's resource limit to be preserved.  A  value  of
will cause the target user's default resource limit to be used on
systems  that  allow  per-user  resource limits to be configured.
Only available starting with API version 1.18.  The maximum  size
that  the  process may lock in memory (in bytes), if supported by
the operating system.  The soft and hard limits are separated  by
a  comma.  If only a single value is specified, both the hard and
soft limits are set.  A value  of  indicates  that  there  is  no
limit.   A value of will cause the invoking user's resource limit
to be preserved.  A value of will cause the target user's default
resource limit to be used on systems that allow per-user resource
limits to be configured.  Only available starting with  API  ver-
sion 1.18.  The maximum number of files that the process may have
open.   The  soft  and  hard limits are separated by a comma.  If
only a single value is specified, both the hard and  soft  limits
are  set.   A value of indicates that there is no limit.  A value
of will cause the invoking user's resource limit to be preserved.
A value of will cause the target user's default resource limit to
be used on systems that allow per-user resource limits to be con-
figured.  Only available starting with  API  version  1.18.   The
maximum number of processes that the user may run simultaneously.
The  soft  and  hard  limits are separated by a comma.  If only a
single value is specified, both the hard and soft limits are set.
A value of indicates that there is no limit.   A  value  of  will
cause  the  invoking  user's  resource  limit to be preserved.  A
value of will cause the target user's default resource  limit  to
be used on systems that allow per-user resource limits to be con-
figured.   Only  available  starting  with API version 1.18.  The
maximum size to which the process's resident set  size  may  grow
(in  bytes).   The soft and hard limits are separated by a comma.
If only a single value is specified, both the hard and soft  lim-
its  are  set.   A  value of indicates that there is no limit.  A
value of will cause the invoking user's resource limit to be pre-
served.  A value of will cause the target user's default resource
limit to be used on systems that allow per-user  resource  limits
to be configured.  Only available starting with API version 1.18.
The  maximum  size  to  which  the  process's  stack may grow (in
bytes).  The soft and hard limits are separated by a  comma.   If
only  a  single value is specified, both the hard and soft limits
are set.  A value of indicates that there is no limit.   A  value
of will cause the invoking user's resource limit to be preserved.
A value of will cause the target user's default resource limit to
be used on systems that allow per-user resource limits to be con-
figured.   Only available starting with API version 1.18.  Effec-
tive group-ID to run the command as.  If not specified, the value
of is used.  Effective user-ID to run the  command  as.   If  not
specified, the value of is used.  Group-ID to run the command as.
The name of the group the command will run as, if it is different
from the default group.  This value is provided for auditing pur-
poses  only,  the  front-end uses and when executing the command.
The supplementary group vector to use for the command in the form
of a comma-separated list of group-IDs.  If is set,  this  option
is ignored.  User-ID to run the command as.  The name of the user
the command will run as, which should correspond to (or if is not
set).   This  value  is  provided for auditing purposes only, the
front-end uses and when executing the command.  SELinux  role  to
use when executing the command.  SELinux type to use when execut-
ing  the  command.  Create a utmp (or utmpx) entry when a pseudo-
terminal is allocated.  By default, the new entry will be a  copy
of  the  user's existing utmp entry (if any), with the tty, time,
type, and pid fields updated.  Set to true  when  in  mode.   The
plugin may enable mode even if was not invoked as This allows the
plugin  to  perform command substitution and transparently enable
when the user attempts to run an editor.  Set to false to disable
directory writability checks in By  default,  1.8.16  and  higher
will  check all directory components of the path to be edited for
writability by the invoking user.  Symbolic  links  will  not  be
followed  in  writable directories and will refuse to edit a file
located in a writable directory.  These restrictions are not  en-
forced  when  is  run by root.  The option can be set to false to
disable this check.  Only available  starting  with  API  version
1.8.  Set to true to allow to edit files that are symbolic links.
By  default,  1.8.15  and  higher  will refuse to open a symbolic
link.  The option can be used to restore the older  behavior  and
allow  to  open symbolic links.  Only available starting with API
version 1.8.  The number of files to be edited by the  user.   If
present, this is will be used by the front-end to determine which
elements  of the vector are files to be edited.  The element must
immediately precede the first file to be edited.  If is not spec-
ified, the front-end will use the position of the element to  de-
termine where the file list begins.  Only available starting with
API  version  1.21.   Command timeout.  If non-zero then when the
timeout expires the command will be killed.   The  file  creation
mask  to use when executing the command.  This value may be over-
ridden by PAM or login.conf on some systems unless the option  is
also  set.   Force  the value specified by the option to override
any umask set by PAM or login.conf.  If set, will use  to  imple-
ment intercept mode if supported by the system.  This setting has
no  effect  unless is also set.  Only available starting with API
version 1.19.  Allocate a pseudo-terminal to run the command  in,
regardless  of whether or not I/O logging is in use.  By default,
will only run the command in a pseudo-terminal when  an  I/O  log
plugin  is loaded.  User name to use when constructing a new utmp
(or utmpx) entry when is enabled.  This option can be used to set
the user field in the utmp entry to the user the command runs  as
rather than the invoking user.  If not set, will base the new en-
try  on  the  invoking user's existing entry.  Unsupported values
will be ignored.  The argument vector to pass to the system  call
when  executing the command.  The plugin is responsible for allo-
cating and populating the vector.  The environment vector to  use
when  executing the command.  The plugin is responsible for allo-
cating and populating the vector.   If  the  function  returns  a
value other than 1, the plugin may store a message describing the
failure  or  error  in The front-end will then pass this value to
any registered audit plugins.  The string stored in  must  remain
valid  until  the  plugin's function is called.  The parameter is
only available starting with API version 1.15.   A  plugin  check
the  API  version specified by the front-end before using Failure
to do so may result in a crash.  int  (*list)(int  argc,  char  *
const argv[], int verbose,
    const char *user, const char **errstr); List available privi-
leges for the invoking user.  Returns 1 on success, 0 on failure,
and -1 on error.  On error, the plugin may optionally call the or
function  with  to  present  additional  error information to the
user.  Privileges should be output via the or function using  The
function  arguments are as follows: The number of elements in not
counting the final pointer.  If an argument vector  describing  a
command  the  user wishes to check against the policy in the same
form as what would be passed to the system call.  If the  command
is  permitted by the policy, the fully-qualified path to the com-
mand should be displayed along with any command  line  arguments.
Flag indicating whether to list in verbose mode or not.  The name
of  a  different user to list privileges for if the policy allows
it.  If the plugin should list the  privileges  of  the  invoking
user.   If  the function returns a value other than 1, the plugin
may store a message describing the failure or error in The front-
end will then pass this value to any  registered  audit  plugins.
The  string  stored in must remain valid until the plugin's func-
tion is called.  The parameter is only  available  starting  with
API  version  1.15.   A plugin check the API version specified by
the front-end before using Failure to  do  so  may  result  in  a
crash.   int  (*validate)(const  char  **errstr); The function is
called when is run with the option.  For policy plugins  such  as
that  cache  authentication credentials, this function will vali-
date and cache the credentials.  The function should  be  if  the
plugin  does  not  support credential caching.  Returns 1 on suc-
cess, 0 on failure, and -1 on error.  On error,  the  plugin  may
optionally  call the or function with to present additional error
information to the user.  The function arguments are as  follows:
If  the  function  returns  a  value other than 1, the plugin may
store a message describing the failure or error in The  front-end
will  then  pass this value to any registered audit plugins.  The
string stored in must remain valid until the plugin's function is
called.  The parameter is only available starting with  API  ver-
sion  1.15.   A  plugin  check  the  API version specified by the
front-end before using Failure to do so may result  in  a  crash.
void  (*invalidate)(int  rmcred);  The function is called when is
run with the or option.  For policy plugins such  as  that  cache
authentication  credentials,  this  function  will invalidate the
credentials.  If the flag is non-zero, the plugin may remove  the
credentials  instead  of  simply invalidating them.  The function
should be if the plugin does not support credential caching.  int
(*init_session)(struct passwd *pwd, char **user_env[],
    const char **errstr); The function is called before  sets  up
the execution environment for the command.  It is run in the par-
ent  process before any user-ID or group-ID changes.  This can be
used to perform session setup that is not supported  by  such  as
opening  the  PAM session.  The function can be used to tear down
the session that was opened by Returns 1 on success, 0  on  fail-
ure,  and  -1 on error.  On error, the plugin may optionally call
the or function with to present additional error  information  to
the  user.  The function arguments are as follows: If the user-ID
the command will run as was found in the password database,  will
describe  that  user, otherwise it will be The environment vector
to use when executing the  command.   This  is  the  same  string
passed  back  to the front-end via the Policy Plugin's parameter.
If the function needs to modify the user environment,  it  should
update  the  pointer  stored in The expected use case is to merge
the contents of the PAM environment (if any) with the contents of
The parameter is only available starting with API version 1.2.  A
plugin check the API version specified by  the  front-end  before
using  Failure  to  do so may result in a crash.  If the function
returns a value other than 1, the plugin may store a message  de-
scribing  the  failure  or  error in The front-end will then pass
this value to any registered audit plugins.  The string stored in
must remain valid until the plugin's function is called.  The pa-
rameter is only available starting with API version 1.15.  A plu-
gin check the API version specified by the front-end before using
Failure  to  do  so  may  result  in  a  crash.   void   (*regis-
ter_hooks)(int version,
   int (*register_hook)(struct sudo_hook *hook)); The function is
called  by  the  sudo  front-end to register any hooks the plugin
needs.  If the plugin does not support hooks, should  be  set  to
the pointer.  The argument describes the version of the hooks API
supported  by the front-end.  The function should be used to reg-
ister any supported hooks the plugin needs.  It returns 0 on suc-
cess, 1 if the hook type is not supported, and -1  if  the  major
version in does not match the front-end's major hook API version.
See  the  section  below  for  more information about hooks.  The
function is only available starting with API version 1.2.  If the
front-end doesn't support API version 1.2 or higher, will not  be
called.  void (*deregister_hooks)(int version,
   int  (*deregister_hook)(struct sudo_hook *hook)); The function
is called by the sudo front-end to deregister any hooks the  plu-
gin has registered.  If the plugin does not support hooks, should
be set to the pointer.  The argument describes the version of the
hooks  API  supported  by  the front-end.  The function should be
used to deregister any hooks that were put in place by the  func-
tion.   If  the plugin tries to deregister a hook that the front-
end does not support, will return an error.  See the section  be-
low  for  more  information  about  hooks.   The function is only
available starting  with  API  version  1.2.   If  the  front-end
doesn't  support  API  version 1.2 or higher, will not be called.
struct sudo_plugin_event * (*event_alloc)(void); The function  is
used  to allocate a which provides access to the main event loop.
Unlike the other fields, the pointer is filled in by  the  front-
end,  not by the plugin.  See the section below for more informa-
tion about events.  The function is only available starting  with
API  version  1.15.  If the front-end doesn't support API version
1.15 or higher, will not be set.  /* Plugin API version major/mi-
nor. */ #define SUDO_API_VERSION_MAJOR  1  #define  SUDO_API_VER-
SION_MINOR  13  #define  SUDO_API_MKVERSION(x, y) ((x << 16) | y)
#define SUDO_API_VERSION  SUDO_API_MKVERSION(SUDO_API_VERSION_MA-
JOR,\
                                            SUDO_API_VERSION_MI-
NOR)

/*  Getters  and setters for API version */ #define SUDO_API_VER-
SION_GET_MAJOR(v) ((v) >>  16)  #define  SUDO_API_VERSION_GET_MI-
NOR(v)  ((v)  & 0xffff) #define SUDO_API_VERSION_SET_MAJOR(vp, n)
do { \
    *(vp) = (*(vp) & 0x0000ffff) | ((n) << 16); \ } while(0) #de-
fine SUDO_API_VERSION_SET_MINOR(vp, n) do { \
    *(vp) = (*(vp) & 0xffff0000)  |  (n);  \  }  while(0)  struct
io_plugin { #define SUDO_IO_PLUGIN 2
    unsigned int type; /* always SUDO_IO_PLUGIN */
    unsigned int version; /* always SUDO_API_VERSION */
    int (*open)(unsigned int version, sudo_conv_t conversation,
        sudo_printf_t   sudo_plugin_printf,  char  *  const  set-
tings[],
        char * const user_info[], char * const command_info[],
        int argc, char * const argv[], char * const user_env[],
        char * const plugin_options[], const char **errstr);
    void (*close)(int exit_status, int error); /* wait status  or
error */
    int (*show_version)(int verbose);
    int (*log_ttyin)(const char *buf, unsigned int len,
        const char **errstr);
    int (*log_ttyout)(const char *buf, unsigned int len,
        const char **errstr);
    int (*log_stdin)(const char *buf, unsigned int len,
        const char **errstr);
    int (*log_stdout)(const char *buf, unsigned int len,
        const char **errstr);
    int (*log_stderr)(const char *buf, unsigned int len,
        const char **errstr);
    void (*register_hooks)(int version,
       int (*register_hook)(struct sudo_hook *hook));
    void (*deregister_hooks)(int version,
       int (*deregister_hook)(struct sudo_hook *hook));
    int (*change_winsize)(unsigned int lines, unsigned int cols,
        const char **errstr);
    int (*log_suspend)(int signo, const char **errstr);
    struct  sudo_plugin_event  * (*event_alloc)(void); }; When an
I/O plugin is loaded, runs  the  command  in  a  pseudo-terminal.
This  makes  it  possible  to  log  the input and output from the
user's session.  If any of the standard input,  standard  output,
or standard error do not correspond to a tty, will open a pipe to
capture  the  I/O for logging before passing it on.  The function
receives the raw user input from the terminal device  (this  will
include input even when echo is disabled, such as when a password
is  read).  The function receives output from the pseudo-terminal
that is suitable for replaying the  user's  session  at  a  later
time.   The  and functions are only called if the standard input,
standard output, or standard  error  respectively  correspond  to
something  other than a tty.  Any of the logging functions may be
set to the pointer if no logging is to be performed.  If the open
function returns 0, no I/O will be sent to the plugin.  If a log-
ging function returns an error the running command will be termi-
nated and all of the plugin's logging functions will be disabled.
Other I/O logging plugins will still receive any remaining  input
or  output  that has not yet been processed.  If an input logging
function rejects the data by returning 0,  the  command  will  be
terminated and the data will not be passed to the command, though
it  will  still  be sent to any other I/O logging plugins.  If an
output logging function rejects the data by returning 0, the com-
mand will be terminated and the data will not be written  to  the
terminal,  though  it will still be sent to any other I/O logging
plugins.  A has the following fields: The field should always  be
set  to  The  field should be set to This allows to determine the
API version the plugin was built against.   int  (*open)(unsigned
int version, sudo_conv_t conversation,
    sudo_printf_t sudo_plugin_printf, char * const settings[],
    char * const user_info[], char * const command_info[],
    int argc, char * const argv[], char * const user_env[],
    char  *  const  plugin_options[]); The function is run before
the or functions are called.  It is only called if the version is
being requested or if the policy plugin's function  has  returned
successfully.   It  returns  1  on success, 0 on failure, -1 if a
general error occurred, or -2 if there was a usage error.  In the
latter case, will print a usage message before it exits.   If  an
error occurs, the plugin may optionally call the or function with
to  present  additional error information to the user.  The func-
tion arguments are as follows: The version passed  in  by  allows
the plugin to determine the major and minor version number of the
plugin  API  supported  by  A pointer to the function that may be
used by the function to display version information (see  below).
The function may also be used to display additional error message
to  the  user.  The function returns 0 on success and -1 on fail-
ure.  A pointer to a function that may be used by the function to
display version information (see show_version below).  The  func-
tion  may also be used to display additional error message to the
user.  The function returns number of characters printed on  suc-
cess  and  -1  on failure.  A vector of user-supplied settings in
the form of strings.  The vector  is  terminated  by  a  pointer.
These settings correspond to options the user specified when run-
ning  As  such,  they will only be present when the corresponding
option has been specified on the command line.  When parsing  the
plugin  should split on the equal sign since the field will never
include one itself but the might.  See the section for a list  of
all  possible  settings.   A vector of information about the user
running the command in the form of strings.  The vector is termi-
nated by a pointer.  When parsing the plugin should split on  the
equal  sign since the field will never include one itself but the
might.  See the section for a list of all  possible  strings.   A
vector  of  information  describing  the command being run in the
form of strings.  The vector is terminated by  a  pointer.   When
parsing the plugin should split on the equal sign since the field
will never include one itself but the might.  See the section for
a  list  of  all possible strings.  The number of elements in not
counting the final pointer.  It can be  zero,  such  as  when  is
called  with the option.  If an argument vector describing a com-
mand the user wishes to run in the same form  as  what  would  be
passed to the system call.  The user's environment in the form of
a vector of strings.  When parsing the plugin should split on the
equal  sign since the field will never include one itself but the
might.  Any (non-comment) strings immediately  after  the  plugin
path are treated as arguments to the plugin.  These arguments are
split  on  a white space boundary and are passed to the plugin in
the form of a array of strings.  If no arguments were  specified,
will  be  the  pointer.  The parameter is only available starting
with API version 1.2.  A plugin check the API  version  specified
by  the  front-end  before using Failure to do so may result in a
crash.  If the function returns a value other than 1, the  plugin
may store a message describing the failure or error in The front-
end  will  then  pass this value to any registered audit plugins.
The string stored in must remain valid until the  plugin's  func-
tion  is  called.   The parameter is only available starting with
API version 1.15.  A plugin check the API  version  specified  by
the  front-end  before  using  Failure  to  do so may result in a
crash.  void (*close)(int exit_status, int error);  The  function
is  called  when is finished, shortly before it exits.  The func-
tion arguments are as follows: The command's exit status, as  re-
turned  by  the  system call, or zero if no command was run.  The
value of is undefined if is non-zero.  If the command  could  not
be  executed, this is set to the value of set by the system call.
If the command was successfully executed, the value of  is  zero.
int  (*show_version)(int verbose); The function is called by when
the user specifies the option.  The plugin may display  its  ver-
sion  information  to  the  user via the or function using If the
user requests detailed version information, the flag will be non-
zero.  Returns 1 on success, 0 on failure, -1 if a general  error
occurred,  or  -2 if there was a usage error, although the return
value is currently ignored.  int  (*log_ttyin)(const  char  *buf,
unsigned int len,
    const  char  **errstr);  The function is called whenever data
can be read from the user but before it is passed to the  running
command.   This allows the plugin to reject data if it chooses to
(for instance if the input contains banned content).   Returns  1
if the data should be passed to the command, 0 if the data is re-
jected  (which  will  terminate the running command), or -1 if an
error occurred.  The  function  arguments  are  as  follows:  The
buffer  containing  user  input.  The length of in bytes.  If the
function returns a value other than 1, the  plugin  may  store  a
message  describing  the  failure  or error in The front-end will
then pass this value to any registered audit plugins.  The string
stored in must  remain  valid  until  the  plugin's  function  is
called.   The  parameter is only available starting with API ver-
sion 1.15.  A plugin check  the  API  version  specified  by  the
front-end  before  using  Failure to do so may result in a crash.
int (*log_ttyout)(const char *buf, unsigned int len,
    const char **errstr); The function is  called  whenever  data
can  be  read  from  the  command but before it is written to the
user's terminal.  This allows the plugin to  reject  data  if  it
chooses  to (for instance if the output contains banned content).
Returns 1 if the data should be passed to the user, 0 if the data
is rejected (which will terminate the running command), or -1  if
an  error  occurred.   The function arguments are as follows: The
buffer containing command output.  The length of  in  bytes.   If
the function returns a value other than 1, the plugin may store a
message  describing  the  failure  or error in The front-end will
then pass this value to any registered audit plugins.  The string
stored in must  remain  valid  until  the  plugin's  function  is
called.   The  parameter is only available starting with API ver-
sion 1.15.  A plugin check  the  API  version  specified  by  the
front-end  before  using  Failure to do so may result in a crash.
int (*log_stdin)(const char *buf, unsigned int len,
    const char **errstr); The function is only used if the  stan-
dard  input  does  not  correspond to a tty device.  It is called
whenever data can be read from the standard input but  before  it
is  passed to the running command.  This allows the plugin to re-
ject data if it chooses to (for instance if  the  input  contains
banned  content).   Returns 1 if the data should be passed to the
command, 0 if the data is rejected (which will terminate the run-
ning command), or -1 if an error occurred.   The  function  argu-
ments  are  as  follows:  The  buffer containing user input.  The
length of in bytes.  If the function returns a value  other  than
1, the plugin may store a message describing the failure or error
in  The front-end will then pass this value to any registered au-
dit plugins.  The string stored in must remain  valid  until  the
plugin's  function  is  called.   The parameter is only available
starting with API version 1.15.  A plugin check the  API  version
specified  by the front-end before using Failure to do so may re-
sult in a crash.  int (*log_stdout)(const char *buf, unsigned int
len,
    const char **errstr); The function is only used if the  stan-
dard  output  does  not correspond to a tty device.  It is called
whenever data can be read from the command but before it is writ-
ten to the standard output.  This allows  the  plugin  to  reject
data if it chooses to (for instance if the output contains banned
content).   Returns 1 if the data should be passed to the user, 0
if the data is rejected (which will terminate  the  running  com-
mand), or -1 if an error occurred.  The function arguments are as
follows:  The buffer containing command output.  The length of in
bytes.  If the function returns a value other than 1, the  plugin
may store a message describing the failure or error in The front-
end  will  then  pass this value to any registered audit plugins.
The string stored in must remain valid until the  plugin's  func-
tion  is  called.   The parameter is only available starting with
API version 1.15.  A plugin check the API  version  specified  by
the  front-end  before  using  Failure  to  do so may result in a
crash.  int (*log_stderr)(const char *buf, unsigned int len,
    const char **errstr); The function is only used if the  stan-
dard  error  does  not  correspond to a tty device.  It is called
whenever data can be read from the command but before it is writ-
ten to the standard error.  This allows the plugin to reject data
if it chooses to (for instance if the output contains banned con-
tent).  Returns 1 if the data should be passed to the user, 0  if
the  data is rejected (which will terminate the running command),
or -1 if an error occurred.  The function arguments are  as  fol-
lows:  The  buffer  containing  command output.  The length of in
bytes.  If the function returns a value other than 1, the  plugin
may store a message describing the failure or error in The front-
end  will  then  pass this value to any registered audit plugins.
The string stored in must remain valid until the  plugin's  func-
tion  is  called.   The parameter is only available starting with
API version 1.15.  A plugin check the API  version  specified  by
the  front-end  before  using  Failure  to  do so may result in a
crash.  See the section for a description of See the section  for
a  description  of  int (*change_winsize)(unsigned int lines, un-
signed int cols,
    const char **errstr); The function  is  called  whenever  the
window size of the terminal changes from the initial values spec-
ified  in  the  list.   Returns -1 if an error occurred, in which
case no further calls to will be made, The function arguments are
as follows: The number of lines (rows) in the re-sized  terminal.
The  number of columns in the re-sized terminal.  If the function
returns a value other than 1, the plugin may store a message  de-
scribing  the  failure  or  error in The front-end will then pass
this value to any registered audit plugins.  The string stored in
must remain valid until the plugin's function is called.  The pa-
rameter is only available starting with API version 1.15.  A plu-
gin check the API version specified by the front-end before using
Failure to do so may result in a crash.   int  (*log_suspend)(int
signo,  const  char  **errstr); The function is called whenever a
command is suspended or resumed.  Logging this information  makes
it  possible to skip the period of time when the command was sus-
pended during playback of a session.  Returns -1 if an error  oc-
curred, in which case no further calls to will be made, The func-
tion arguments are as follows: The signal that caused the command
to  be suspended, or if the command was resumed.  If the function
returns a value other than 1, the plugin may store a message  de-
scribing  the  failure  or  error in The front-end will then pass
this value to any registered audit plugins.  The string stored in
must remain valid until the plugin's function is called.  The pa-
rameter is only available starting with API version 1.15.  A plu-
gin check the API version specified by the front-end before using
Failure to do so may result in a crash.  struct sudo_plugin_event
* (*event_alloc)(void); The function is used to allocate a  which
provides access to the main event loop.  Unlike the other fields,
the  pointer  is  filled  in by the front-end, not by the plugin.
See the section below for more  information  about  events.   The
function  is  only  available starting with API version 1.15.  If
the front-end doesn't support API version 1.15  or  higher,  will
not  be set.  Same as for the /* Audit plugin close function sta-
tus types. */ #define SUDO_PLUGIN_NO_STATUS            0  #define
SUDO_PLUGIN_WAIT_STATUS          1 #define SUDO_PLUGIN_EXEC_ERROR
2 #define SUDO_PLUGIN_SUDO_ERROR          3

#define SUDO_AUDIT_PLUGIN 3 struct audit_plugin {
    unsigned int type; /* always SUDO_AUDIT_PLUGIN */
    unsigned int version; /* always SUDO_API_VERSION */
    int (*open)(unsigned int version, sudo_conv_t conversation,
        sudo_printf_t  sudo_plugin_printf,  char  *  const   set-
tings[],
        char * const user_info[], int submit_optind,
        char * const submit_argv[], char * const submit_envp[],
        char * const plugin_options[], const char **errstr);
    void (*close)(int status_type, int status);
    int (*accept)(const char *plugin_name,
        unsigned int plugin_type, char * const command_info[],
        char * const run_argv[], char * const run_envp[],
        const char **errstr);
    int  (*reject)(const  char  *plugin_name,  unsigned  int plu-
gin_type,
        const char *audit_msg, char * const command_info[],
        const char **errstr);
    int  (*error)(const  char  *plugin_name,  unsigned  int  plu-
gin_type,
        const char *audit_msg, char * const command_info[],
        const char **errstr);
    int (*show_version)(int verbose);
    void (*register_hooks)(int version,
        int (*register_hook)(struct sudo_hook *hook));
    void (*deregister_hooks)(int version,
        int (*deregister_hook)(struct sudo_hook *hook));
    struct  sudo_plugin_event  * (*event_alloc)(void); } An audit
plugin can be used to log successful and unsuccessful attempts to
run independent of the policy or any I/O plugins.  Multiple audit
plugins may be specified in A has the following fields: The field
should always be set to The field should be set to This allows to
determine the API version the  plugin  was  built  against.   int
(*open)(unsigned int version, sudo_conv_t conversation,
    sudo_printf_t sudo_plugin_printf, char * const settings[],
    char * const user_info[], int submit_optind,
    char * const submit_argv[], char * const submit_envp[],
    char  * const plugin_options[], const char **errstr); The au-
dit function is run before any other plugin API functions.   This
makes it possible to audit failures in the other plugins.  It re-
turns 1 on success, 0 on failure, -1 if a general error occurred,
or -2 if there was a usage error.  In the latter case, will print
a  usage message before it exits.  If an error occurs, the plugin
may optionally call the or function with  to  present  additional
error  information  to  the  user.  The function arguments are as
follows: The version passed in by allows the plugin to  determine
the major and minor version number of the plugin API supported by
A  pointer  to  the  function that may be used by the function to
display version information (see below).  The function  may  also
be  used  to  display  additional error message to the user.  The
function returns 0 on success, and -1 on failure.  A pointer to a
function that may be used by the function to display version  in-
formation  (see  show_version  below).   The function may also be
used to display additional error message to the user.  The  func-
tion  returns  number  of characters printed on success and -1 on
failure.  A vector of  user-supplied  settings  in  the  form  of
strings.   The vector is terminated by a pointer.  These settings
correspond to options the user specified when  running  As  such,
they  will only be present when the corresponding option has been
specified on the command line.  When parsing  the  plugin  should
split  on  the  equal sign since the field will never include one
itself but the might.  See the section for a list of all possible
settings.  A vector of information about  the  user  running  the
command  in  the  form of strings.  The vector is terminated by a
pointer.  When parsing the plugin should split on the equal  sign
since the field will never include one itself but the might.  See
the  section  for a list of all possible strings.  The index into
that corresponds to the first entry that is not  a  command  line
option.   If only consists of options, which may be the case with
the or options, will evaluate to the NULL pointer.  The  argument
vector was invoked with, including all command line options.  The
argument can be used to determine the end of the command line op-
tions.   The  invoking user's environment in the form of a vector
of strings.  When parsing the plugin should split  on  the  equal
sign since the field will never include one itself but the might.
Any  (non-comment)  strings immediately after the plugin path are
treated as arguments to the plugin.  These arguments are split on
a white space boundary and are passed to the plugin in  the  form
of  a  array of strings.  If no arguments were specified, will be
the pointer.  If the function returns a value other than  1,  the
plugin may store a message describing the failure or error in The
front-end will then pass this value to any registered audit plug-
ins.   The  string stored in must remain valid until the plugin's
function is called.  void (*close)(int status_type, int  status);
The function is called when is finished, shortly before it exits.
The  function  arguments are as follows: The type of status being
passed.  One of or Depending on the value of this value is either
ignored, the command's exit status  as  returned  by  the  system
call,  the  value  of set by the system call, or the value of re-
sulting from an error in the front-end.  int (*accept)(const char
*plugin_name, unsigned int plugin_type,
    char * const command_info[], char * const run_argv[],
    char * const run_envp[], const char **errstr);  The  function
is called when a command or action is accepted by a policy or ap-
proval  plugin.   The function arguments are as follows: The name
of the plugin that accepted the command  or  for  the  front-end.
The type of plugin that accepted the command, currently either or
The  function  is  called multiple times--once for each policy or
approval plugin that succeeds and once for  the  sudo  front-end.
When called on behalf of the sudo front-end, may include informa-
tion  from  an  I/O  logging plugin as well.  Typically, an audit
plugin is interested in either the accept status from the  front-
end  or  from  the  various  policy and approval plugins, but not
both.  It is possible for the policy plugin to accept  a  command
that  is  later rejected by an approval plugin, in which case the
audit plugin's and functions will be called.  An optional  vector
of  information  describing  the command being run in the form of
strings.  The vector is terminated by a  pointer.   When  parsing
the  plugin  should  split on the equal sign since the field will
never include one itself but the might.  See the  section  for  a
list  of  all  possible  strings.  A argument vector describing a
command that will be run in the same form as what would be passed
to the system call.  The environment the command will be run with
in the form of a vector of  strings.   When  parsing  the  plugin
should split on the equal sign since the field will never include
one  itself but the might.  If the function returns a value other
than 1, the plugin may store a message describing the failure  or
error  in  The  front-end will then pass this value to any regis-
tered audit plugins.  The string stored in must remain valid  un-
til  the  plugin's  function is called.  int (*reject)(const char
*plugin_name, unsigned int plugin_type,
    const char *audit_msg, char * const command_info[],
    const char **errstr); The function is called when  a  command
or action is rejected by a plugin.  The function arguments are as
follows:  The  name of the plugin that rejected the command.  The
type of plugin that rejected the command, currently either or Un-
like the function, the function is not called on  behalf  of  the
front-end.   An optional string describing the reason the command
was rejected by the plugin.  If the plugin did not provide a rea-
son, will be the pointer.  An optional vector of information  de-
scribing  the command being run in the form of strings.  The vec-
tor is terminated by a pointer.  When parsing the  plugin  should
split  on  the  equal sign since the field will never include one
itself but the might.  See the section for a list of all possible
strings.  If the function returns a value other than 1, the  plu-
gin  may  store  a message describing the failure or error in The
front-end will then pass this value to any registered audit plug-
ins.  The string stored in must remain valid until  the  plugin's
function  is  called.   int (*error)(const char *plugin_name, un-
signed int plugin_type,
    const char *audit_msg, char * const command_info[],
    const char **errstr); The function is called when a plugin or
the front-end returns an error.  The function  arguments  are  as
follows:  The  name of the plugin that generated the error or for
the front-end.  The type of plugin that generated the  error,  or
for  the front-end.  An optional string describing the plugin er-
ror.  If the plugin did not provide a description,  will  be  the
pointer.   An  optional vector of information describing the com-
mand being run in the form of strings.  The vector is  terminated
by  a pointer.  When parsing the plugin should split on the equal
sign since the field will never include one itself but the might.
See the section for a list of all possible strings.  If the func-
tion returns a value other than 1, the plugin may store a message
describing the failure or error in The front-end will  then  pass
this value to any registered audit plugins.  The string stored in
must  remain  valid  until  the plugin's function is called.  int
(*show_version)(int verbose); The function is called by when  the
user  specifies  the  option.  The plugin may display its version
information to the user via the or function using If the user re-
quests detailed version information, the  verbose  flag  will  be
set.   Returns  1 on success, 0 on failure, -1 if a general error
occurred, or -2 if there was a usage error, although  the  return
value is currently ignored.  See the section for a description of
See  the  section for a description of struct sudo_plugin_event *
(*event_alloc)(void); The function is used to  allocate  a  which
provides access to the main event loop.  Unlike the other fields,
the  pointer  is  filled  in by the front-end, not by the plugin.
See the section below for more  information  about  events.   The
function  is  only  available starting with API version 1.17.  If
the front-end doesn't support API version 1.17  or  higher,  will
not  be set.  struct approval_plugin { #define SUDO_APPROVAL_PLU-
GIN 4
    unsigned int type; /* always SUDO_APPROVAL_PLUGIN */
    unsigned int version; /* always SUDO_API_VERSION */
    int (*open)(unsigned int version, sudo_conv_t conversation,
        sudo_printf_t  sudo_plugin_printf,  char  *  const   set-
tings[],
        char * const user_info[], int submit_optind,
        char * const submit_argv[], char * const submit_envp[],
        char * const plugin_options[], const char **errstr);
    void (*close)(void);
    int  (*check)(char  *  const  command_info[],  char  *  const
run_argv[],
        char * const run_envp[], const char **errstr);
    int (*show_version)(int verbose); }; An approval  plugin  can
be  used  to apply extra constraints after a command has been ac-
cepted by the policy plugin.  Unlike the other plugin  types,  it
does  not remain open until the command completes.  The plugin is
opened before a call to or and closed shortly  thereafter  (audit
plugin  functions  must  be  called before the plugin is closed).
Multiple approval plugins may be specified in A has the following
fields: The field should always be set to The field should be set
to This allows to determine the API version the plugin was  built
against.  int (*open)(unsigned int version, sudo_conv_t conversa-
tion,
    sudo_printf_t sudo_plugin_printf, char * const settings[],
    char * const user_info[], int submit_optind,
    char * const submit_argv[], char * const submit_envp[],
    char  * const plugin_options[], const char **errstr); The ap-
proval function is run immediately before a call to the  plugin's
or  functions.   It  is  only  called if the version is being re-
quested or if the policy plugin's function has returned  success-
fully.   It  returns  1 on success, 0 on failure, -1 if a general
error occurred, or -2 if there was a usage error.  In the  latter
case,  will  print  a usage message before it exits.  If an error
occurs, the plugin may optionally call the or  function  with  to
present  additional  error information to the user.  The function
arguments are as follows: The version passed  in  by  allows  the
plugin  to  determine  the  major and minor version number of the
plugin API supported by A pointer to the  function  that  can  be
used  by  the plugin to interact with the user (see for details).
Returns 0 on success and -1 on failure.  A pointer to a  function
that  may be used to display informational or error messages (see
for details).  Returns the number of characters printed  on  suc-
cess  and  -1  on failure.  A vector of user-supplied settings in
the form of strings.  The vector  is  terminated  by  a  pointer.
These settings correspond to options the user specified when run-
ning  As  such,  they will only be present when the corresponding
option has been specified on the command line.  When parsing  the
plugin  should split on the equal sign since the field will never
include one itself but the might.  See the section for a list  of
all  possible  settings.   A vector of information about the user
running the command in the form of strings.  The vector is termi-
nated by a pointer.  When parsing the plugin should split on  the
equal  sign since the field will never include one itself but the
might.  See the section for a list of all possible strings.   The
index into that corresponds to the first entry that is not a com-
mand  line option.  If only consists of options, which may be the
case with the or options, will evaluate to the NULL pointer.  The
argument vector was invoked with, including all command line  op-
tions.  The argument can be used to determine the end of the com-
mand  line  options.  The invoking user's environment in the form
of a vector of strings.  When parsing the plugin should split  on
the  equal sign since the field will never include one itself but
the might.  Any (non-comment) strings immediately after the  plu-
gin path are treated as arguments to the plugin.  These arguments
are  split on a white space boundary and are passed to the plugin
in the form of a array of strings.  If no arguments  were  speci-
fied, will be the pointer.  If the function returns a value other
than  1, the plugin may store a message describing the failure or
error in The front-end will then pass this value  to  any  regis-
tered  audit plugins.  The string stored in must remain valid un-
til the plugin's function is called.   void  (*close)(void);  The
function  is called after the approval plugin's or functions have
been called.  It takes no arguments.  The function  is  typically
used  to  perform plugin-specific cleanup, such as the freeing of
memory objects allocated by the plugin.  If the plugin  does  not
need  to  perform  any  cleanup,  may be set to the pointer.  int
(*check)(char * const command_info[], char * const run_argv[],
    char * const run_envp[], const char **errstr);  The  approval
function  is  run after the policy plugin function and before any
I/O logging plugins.  If multiple approval  plugins  are  loaded,
they  must all succeed for the command to be allowed.  It returns
1 on success, 0 on failure, -1 if a general error occurred, or -2
if there was a usage error.  In the latter case, will print a us-
age message before it exits.  If an error occurs, the plugin  may
optionally  call the or function with to present additional error
information to the user.  The function arguments are as  follows:
A  vector  of information describing the command being run in the
form of strings.  The vector is terminated by  a  pointer.   When
parsing the plugin should split on the equal sign since the field
will never include one itself but the might.  See the section for
a  list  of all possible strings.  A argument vector describing a
command that will be run in the same form as what would be passed
to the system call.  The environment the command will be run with
in the form of a vector of  strings.   When  parsing  the  plugin
should split on the equal sign since the field will never include
one  itself but the might.  If the function returns a value other
than 1, the plugin may store a message describing the failure  or
error  in  The  front-end will then pass this value to any regis-
tered audit plugins.  The string stored in must remain valid  un-
til  the  plugin's  function  is called.  int (*show_version)(int
verbose); The function is called by when the user  specifies  the
option.   The  plugin  may display its version information to the
user via the or function using If the user requests detailed ver-
sion information, the verbose flag will be  set.   Returns  1  on
success,  0  on failure, -1 if a general error occurred, or -2 if
there was a usage error, although the return value  is  currently
ignored.   The front-end installs default signal handlers to trap
common signals while the plugin functions are run.  The following
signals are trapped by default before the command is executed: If
a fatal signal is received before the command is  executed,  will
call  the  plugin's  function with an exit status of 128 plus the
value of the signal that was received.  This allows  for  consis-
tent  logging of commands killed by a signal for plugins that log
such information in their function.   An  exception  to  this  is
which  is  ignored  until  the command is executed.  A plugin may
temporarily install its own signal handlers but must restore  the
original  handler  before the plugin function returns.  Beginning
with plugin API version 1.2, it is possible to install hooks  for
certain  functions  called by the front-end.  Currently, the only
supported hooks relate to the handling of environment  variables.
Hooks  can  be  used to intercept attempts to get, set, or remove
environment variables so that these changes can be  reflected  in
the version of the environment that is used to execute a command.
A  future version of the API will support hooking internal front-
end functions as well.  Hooks in are described by  the  following
structure: typedef int (*sudo_hook_fn_t)();

struct sudo_hook {
    unsigned int hook_version;
    unsigned int hook_type;
    sudo_hook_fn_t hook_fn;
    void  *closure;  };  A  has  the  following fields: The field
should be set to The field may be one of the following  supported
hook  types:  The  C library function.  Any registered hooks will
run before the C library implementation.  The field should  be  a
function   that   matches  the  following  typedef:  typedef  int
(*sudo_hook_fn_setenv_t)(const char *name,
   const char *value, int overwrite, void *closure); If the  reg-
istered  hook does not match the typedef the results are unspeci-
fied.  The C library function.  Any registered hooks will run be-
fore the C library implementation.  The field should be  a  func-
tion   that   matches   the   following   typedef:   typedef  int
(*sudo_hook_fn_unsetenv_t)(const char *name,
   void *closure); The C library function.  Any registered  hooks
will  run  before the C library implementation.  The field should
be a function that matches the  following  typedef:  typedef  int
(*sudo_hook_fn_getenv_t)(const char *name,
   char  **value, void *closure); If the registered hook does not
match the typedef the results are  unspecified.   The  C  library
function.  Any registered hooks will run before the C library im-
plementation.   The  field  should be a function that matches the
following  typedef:  typedef  int   (*sudo_hook_fn_putenv_t)(char
*string,
   void  *closure);  If  the  registered  hook does not match the
typedef the results are unspecified.  sudo_hook_fn_t hook_fn; The
field should be set to the plugin's hook implementation.  The ac-
tual function arguments will vary depending on the  (see  above).
In all cases, the field of is passed as the last function parame-
ter.   This  can  be  used to pass arbitrary data to the plugin's
hook implementation.  The function return value may be one of the
following: The hook function encountered an error.  The hook com-
pleted without error, go on to the next hook (including the  sys-
tem implementation if applicable).  For example, a hook might re-
turn  if the specified variable was not found in the private copy
of the environment.  The hook completed without error, stop  pro-
cessing  hooks  for this invocation.  This can be used to replace
the system implementation.  For example, a hook that operates  on
a  private  copy  of  the environment but leaves unchanged.  Care
must be taken when hooking C library functions, it is  very  easy
to  create  an infinite loop.  For example, a hook that calls the
function may create a loop if the implementation calls  to  check
the  locale.  To prevent this, you may wish to use a static vari-
able in the hook function to guard against nested calls.  For ex-
ample: static int in_progress =  0;  /*  avoid  recursion  */  if
(in_progress)
    return  SUDO_HOOK_RET_NEXT; in_progress = 1; ...  in_progress
= 0; return SUDO_HOOK_RET_STOP; /* Hook API  version  major/minor
*/   #define  SUDO_HOOK_VERSION_MAJOR  1  #define  SUDO_HOOK_VER-
SION_MINOR   0    #define    SUDO_HOOK_VERSION    SUDO_API_MKVER-
SION(SUDO_HOOK_VERSION_MAJOR,\
                                              SUDO_HOOK_VER-
SION_MINOR)  For getters and setters see the When runs a command,
it uses an event loop to service signals and I/O.  Events may  be
triggered  based  on  time,  a file or socket descriptor becoming
ready, or due to receipt of a signal.  Starting with API  version
1.15,  it  is  possible for a plugin to participate in this event
loop by calling the function.  Events are described by  the  fol-
lowing  structure:  typedef void (*sudo_plugin_ev_callback_t)(int
fd, int what, void *closure);

struct sudo_plugin_event {
    int (*set)(struct sudo_plugin_event *pev, int fd, int events,
        sudo_plugin_ev_callback_t callback, void *closure);
    int (*add)(struct  sudo_plugin_event  *pev,  struct  timespec
*timeout);
    int (*del)(struct sudo_plugin_event *pev);
    int (*pending)(struct sudo_plugin_event *pev, int events,
        struct timespec *ts);
    int (*fd)(struct sudo_plugin_event *pev);
    void (*setbase)(struct sudo_plugin_event *pev, void *base);
    void (*loopbreak)(struct sudo_plugin_event *pev);
    void  (*free)(struct  sudo_plugin_event  *pev); }; A contains
the following  function  pointers:  int  (*set)(struct  sudo_plu-
gin_event *pev, int fd, int events,
    sudo_plugin_ev_callback_t callback, void *closure); The func-
tion takes the following arguments: A pointer to the itself.  The
file or socket descriptor for I/O-based events or the signal num-
ber  for  signal events.  For time-based events, must be -1.  The
following values determine what will trigger the event  callback:
callback  is  run after the specified timeout expires callback is
run when the file descriptor is readable callback is run when the
file descriptor is writable event is persistent and  remains  en-
abled until explicitly deleted callback is run when the specified
signal  is  received  The  flag may be ORed with any of the event
types.  It is also possible to OR and together to run  the  call-
back when a descriptor is ready to be either read from or written
to.  All other event values are mutually exclusive.  typedef void
(*sudo_plugin_ev_callback_t)(int fd, int what,
    void  *closure);  The function to call when an event is trig-
gered.  The function is run with  the  following  arguments:  The
file or socket descriptor for I/O-based events or the signal num-
ber  for signal events.  The event type that triggered that call-
back.  For events that have multiple event types (for example and
or have an associated timeout, can be used to determine  why  the
callback  was run.  The generic pointer that was specified in the
function.  A generic pointer that will be passed to the  callback
function.   The  function returns 1 on success, and -1 if a error
occurred.  int (*add)(struct sudo_plugin_event *pev, struct time-
spec *timeout); The function adds the event to event  loop.   The
event must have previously been initialized via the function.  If
the  argument is not NULL, it should specify a (relative) timeout
after which the event will be triggered if the main event  crite-
ria  has  not  been  met.  This is often used to implement an I/O
timeout where the event will fire if a descriptor  is  not  ready
within a certain time period.  If the event is already present in
the  event  loop, its will be adjusted to match the new value, if
any.  The function returns 1 on success, and -1 if  a  error  oc-
curred.   int (*del)(struct sudo_plugin_event *pev); The function
deletes the event from event loop.  Deleted events can  be  added
back via the function.  The function returns 1 on success, and -1
if  a  error  occurred.   int (*pending)(struct sudo_plugin_event
*pev, int events,
    struct timespec *ts); The function can be used  to  determine
whether  one  or  more events is pending.  The argument specifies
which events to check for.  See the function for a list of  valid
event  types.   If  is  specified  in the event has an associated
timeout and the pointer is non-NULL, it will be  filled  in  with
the  remaining  time.   int (*fd)(struct sudo_plugin_event *pev);
The function returns the descriptor or signal  number  associated
with  the  event  void  (*setbase)(struct sudo_plugin_event *pev,
void *base); The function sets the underlying event  for  to  the
specified  value.   This can be used to move an event created via
to a new event loop allocated by sudo's event subsystem.   If  is
event  base  is  reset to the default value, which corresponds to
main event loop.  Using this function requires linking the plugin
with the sudo_util library.  It is unlikely to be used outside of
the plugin.  void  (*loopbreak)(struct  sudo_plugin_event  *pev);
The  function  causes event loop to exit immediately and the run-
ning command to be  terminated.   void  (*free)(struct  sudo_plu-
gin_event  *pev);  The  function deletes the event from the event
loop and frees the memory associated with it.  The front-end does
not support running  remote  commands.   However,  starting  with
1.8.8,  the  option  may be used to specify a remote host that is
passed to the policy plugin.  A plugin may also accept a  in  the
form  of which will work with older versions of It is anticipated
that remote commands will be supported by  executing  a  program.
The  policy  plugin  should  setup the execution environment such
that the front-end will run the helper which, in turn, will  con-
nect  to  the  remote host and run the command.  For example, the
policy plugin could utilize to perform remote command  execution.
The  helper  program  would  be  responsible for running with the
proper options to use a private key or certificate that  the  re-
mote  host  will accept and run a program on the remote host that
would setup the execution environment accordingly.  Remote  func-
tionality must be handled by the policy plugin, not itself as the
front-end  has  no  knowledge that a remote command is being exe-
cuted.  This may be addressed in a future revision of the  plugin
API.  If the plugin needs to interact with the user, it may do so
via  the  function.  A plugin should not attempt to read directly
from the standard input or the user's terminal (neither of  which
are  guaranteed  to  exist).   The caller must include a trailing
newline in if one is to be printed.  A function is also available
that can be used to display informational or  error  messages  to
the  user,  which  is usually more convenient for simple messages
where no use input is required.  The conversation function  takes
as   arguments  pointers  to  the  following  structures:  struct
sudo_conv_message { #define SUDO_CONV_PROMPT_ECHO_OFF  0x0001  /*
do  not  echo  user  input  */  #define  SUDO_CONV_PROMPT_ECHO_ON
0x0002  /*  echo  user  input  */   #define   SUDO_CONV_ERROR_MSG
0x0003   /*   error   message   */   #define   SUDO_CONV_INFO_MSG
0x0004 /* informational message */ #define  SUDO_CONV_PROMPT_MASK
0x0005  /*  mask  user  input */ #define SUDO_CONV_PROMPT_ECHO_OK
0x1000 /* flag: allow echo if no tty  */  #define  SUDO_CONV_PRE-
FER_TTY       0x2000 /* flag: use tty if possible */
    int msg_type;
    int timeout;
    const char *msg; };

#define SUDO_CONV_REPL_MAX      1023

struct sudo_conv_reply {
    char *reply; };

typedef int (*sudo_conv_callback_fn_t)(int signo, void *closure);
struct sudo_conv_callback {
    unsigned int version;
    void *closure;
    sudo_conv_callback_fn_t on_suspend;
    sudo_conv_callback_fn_t  on_resume;  };  Pointers  to the and
functions are passed in to the plugin's function when the  plugin
is  initialized.   The  following type definitions can be used in
the declaration of the function: typedef  int  (*sudo_conv_t)(int
num_msgs,
    const struct sudo_conv_message msgs[],
    struct  sudo_conv_reply  replies[], struct sudo_conv_callback
*callback);

typedef int (*sudo_printf_t)(int msg_type, const char *  restrict
fmt,  ...); To use the function, the plugin must pass an array of
and There must be a and for each  message  in  the  conversation,
that is, both arrays must have the same number of elements.  Each
must  have  its  member initialized to The pointer, if not should
contain function pointers to be called when the process  is  sus-
pended  and/or  resumed during conversation input.  The and func-
tions are called with the signal that caused to be suspended  and
the  pointer  from the These functions should return 0 on success
and -1 on error.  On error, the conversation  will  end  and  the
conversation  function  will  return a value of -1.  The intended
use is to allow the plugin to release resources, such  as  locks,
that  should  not  be  held indefinitely while suspended and then
reacquire them when the process is resumed.   The  functions  are
not  actually  invoked from within a signal handler.  The must be
set to one of the following values: Prompt  the  user  for  input
with  echo  disabled;  this is generally used for passwords.  The
reply will be stored in the array, and it will  never  be  Prompt
the  user  for input with echo enabled.  The reply will be stored
in the array, and it will never be Display an error message.  The
message is written to the standard error unless the flag is  set,
in  which  case it is written to the user's terminal if possible.
Display a message.  The message is written to the standard output
unless the flag is set, in which case it is written to the user's
terminal if possible.  Prompt the user for input but echo an  as-
terisk  character  for  each  character  read.  The reply will be
stored in the array, and it will never be This  can  be  used  to
provide  visual  feedback to the user while reading sensitive in-
formation that should not be displayed.  In addition to the above
values, the following flag bits may also be set: Allow  input  to
be  read when echo cannot be disabled when the message type is or
By default, will refuse to read input if the echo cannot be  dis-
abled  for those message types.  When displaying a message via or
try to write the message to the user's terminal.  If the terminal
is unavailable, the standard error or  standard  output  will  be
used, depending upon whether or was used.  The user's terminal is
always  used  when possible for input, this flag is only used for
output.  The in seconds until the prompt will wait  for  no  more
input.   A zero value implies an infinite timeout.  The plugin is
responsible for freeing the reply buffer located in each if it is
not represents the maximum length of the reply  buffer  (not  in-
cluding the trailing NUL character).  In practical terms, this is
the  longest  password  will support.  The function uses the same
underlying mechanism as the function but only  supports  and  for
the parameter.  It can be more convenient than using the function
if  no  user  reply  is  needed  and supports standard escape se-
quences.  See the sample plugin for an example  of  the  function
usage.   As  of 1.9.0, the plugin and functions are called in the
following order: audit open policy open  approval  open  approval
close  I/O log open command runs command exits I/O log close pol-
icy close audit close sudo exits Prior  to  1.9.0,  the  I/O  log
function was called the policy function.  The plugin supports its
own  plugin  interface to allow non-Unix group lookups.  This can
be used to query a group source  other  than  the  standard  Unix
group  database.   Two  sample group plugins are bundled with and
are detailed in Third party group plugins include a QAS AD plugin
available from Quest Software.  A group plugin must  declare  and
populate a in the global scope.  This structure contains pointers
to  the  functions that implement plugin initialization, cleanup,
and group lookup.  struct sudoers_group_plugin {
    unsigned int version;
    int (*init)(int version, sudo_printf_t sudo_plugin_printf,
        char *const argv[]);
    void (*cleanup)(void);
    int (*query)(const char *user, const char *group,
        const struct passwd *pwd); }; A has the following fields:
The field should be set to GROUP_API_VERSION.  This allows to de-
termine the API version the group plugin was built against.   int
(*init)(int version, sudo_printf_t sudo_plugin_printf,
    char  *const  argv[]);  The function is called after has been
parsed but before any policy checks.  It returns 1 on success,  0
on  failure (or if the plugin is not configured), and -1 if a er-
ror occurred.  If an error occurs, the plugin may call the  func-
tion  with  to  present additional error information to the user.
The function arguments are as follows: The version passed  in  by
allows the plugin to determine the major and minor version number
of the group plugin API supported by A pointer to a function that
may  be  used  to  display  informational or error message to the
user.  Returns the number of characters printed on success and -1
on failure.  A array of arguments generated from the option in If
no arguments were given, will be void (*cleanup)(); The  function
is  called when has finished its group checks.  The plugin should
free any memory it has allocated and  close  open  file  handles.
int (*query)(const char *user, const char *group,
    const  struct  passwd  *pwd); The function is used to ask the
group plugin whether is a member of The function arguments are as
follows: The name of the user being looked  up  in  the  external
group  database.  The name of the group being queried.  The pass-
word database entry for if any.  If is not present in  the  pass-
word  database, will be /* Sudoers group plugin version major/mi-
nor */ #define GROUP_API_VERSION_MAJOR 1  #define  GROUP_API_VER-
SION_MINOR  0 #define GROUP_API_VERSION ((GROUP_API_VERSION_MAJOR
<< 16) | \
                           GROUP_API_VERSION_MINOR)  For  getters
and setters see the The following revisions have been made to the
Sudo  Plugin API.  Initial API version.  The I/O logging plugin's
function was modified to take the list as an argument.  The  Pol-
icy  and  I/O logging plugins' functions are now passed a list of
plugin parameters if any are specified in A simple hooks API  has
been introduced to allow plugins to hook in to the system's envi-
ronment  handling  functions.   The Policy plugin function is now
passed a pointer to the user environment which can be updated  as
needed.   This  can  be  used  to  merge in environment variables
stored in the PAM handle before a command is  run.   Support  for
the entry has been added to the list.  The and entries were added
to  the list.  The and functions are now optional.  Previously, a
missing or function would result in a crash.  If no policy plugin
function is defined, a default function will be provided  by  the
front-end that displays a warning if the command could not be ex-
ecuted.   The  front-end  now installs default signal handlers to
trap common signals while the plugin functions are run.  The  en-
try was added to the list.  The entry was added to the list.  The
behavior when an I/O logging plugin returns an error has changed.
Previously, the front-end took no action when the or function re-
turned an error.  The behavior when an I/O logging plugin returns
0 has changed.  Previously, output from the command would be dis-
played  to  the  terminal  even if an output logging function re-
turned 0.  The entry was added to the list.  The entry now starts
with a debug file path name and may occur multiple times if there
are multiple plugin-specific Debug lines in the The  and  entries
were added to the list.  The default value of was changed to true
in  sudo  1.8.16.   The sudo function now takes a pointer to a as
its fourth argument.  The definition has been updated  to  match.
The  plugin  must specify that it supports plugin API version 1.8
or higher to receive a conversation function  pointer  that  sup-
ports this argument.  The entry was added to the list.  The entry
was  added  to the list.  The and entries were added to the list.
The entry was added to the list.  The function was added  to  The
function was added to The entry was added to the list.  The entry
was  added  to the list.  The function was added to and The argu-
ment was added to the policy and I/O plugin functions  which  the
plugin  function  can use to return an error string.  This string
may be used by the audit plugin to report failure or error condi-
tions set by the other plugins.  The function is  now  is  called
regardless  of  whether  or  not a command was actually executed.
This makes it possible for plugins to perform cleanup even when a
command was not run.  has increased from 255 to 1023 bytes.  Sup-
port for audit and approval plugins was added.  Initial  resource
limit  values were added to the list.  The and entries were added
to the list.  The function was added to and The  policy  may  now
set  resource  limit  values  in  the list.  The and entries were
added to the list.  The and entries were added to the list.   The
and  entries  were added to the list.  The entry was added to the
list.  The entry was added to the list.  The entry was  added  to
the  list.   The  entry  was added to the list.  Many people have
worked on over the years; this version consists of  code  written
primarily  by:  See  the CONTRIBUTORS.md file in the distribution
(https://www.sudo.ws/about/contributors/) for an exhaustive  list
of people who have contributed to If you believe you have found a
bug in you can either file a bug report in the sudo bug database,
https://bugzilla.sudo.ws/,     or     open     an     issue    at
https://github.com/sudo-project/sudo/issues.  If you would prefer
to use email, messages may be sent to  the  sudo-workers  mailing
list,  https://www.sudo.ws/mailman/listinfo/sudo-workers (public)
or <sudo@sudo.ws> (private).  Please do not report security  vul-
nerabilities  through  public  GitHub issues, Bugzilla or mailing
lists.  Instead, report them via email to  <Todd.Miller@sudo.ws>.
You  may  encrypt  your message with PGP if you would like, using
the key found at https://www.sudo.ws/dist/PGPKEYS.  Limited  free
support  is  available  via  the  sudo-users  mailing  list,  see
https://www.sudo.ws/mailman/listinfo/sudo-users to  subscribe  or
search the archives.  is provided and any express or implied war-
ranties, including, but not limited to, the implied warranties of
merchantability  and  fitness  for  a particular purpose are dis-
claimed.   See  the   LICENSE.md   file   distributed   with   or
https://www.sudo.ws/about/license/ for complete details.


