The  policy plugin determines a user's privileges.  It is the de-
fault policy plugin.  The policy is driven by the  file  or,  op-
tionally,  in  LDAP.  The policy format is described in detail in
the section.  For information on storing  policy  information  in
LDAP,  see  consults the file to determine which plugins to load.
If no file is present, or if it contains no lines, will  be  used
for  auditing,  policy  decisions and I/O logging.  To explicitly
configure to use the plugin, the following configuration  can  be
used.   Plugin sudoers_audit sudoers.so Plugin sudoers_policy su-
doers.so Plugin sudoers_io sudoers.so Starting with 1.8.5, it  is
possible to specify optional arguments to the plugin in the file.
Plugin  arguments, if any, should be listed after the path to the
plugin (i.e., after The arguments are only effective for the plu-
gin that opens (and parses) the  file.   For  version  1.9.1  and
higher,  this  is the plugin.  For older versions, it is the plu-
gin.  Multiple arguments may be  specified,  separated  by  white
space.    For  example:  Plugin  sudoers_audit  sudoers.so  sudo-
ers_mode=0400 error_recovery=false The following plugin arguments
are supported: The argument can be used to control whether should
attempt to recover from syntax errors in the  file.   If  set  to
(the  default),  will  try to recover from a syntax error by dis-
carding the portion of the line that contains the error until the
end of the line.  A value of will disable error recovery.   Prior
to  version 1.9.3, no error recovery was performed.  The argument
can be used to disable security checks when loading the file.  If
enabled, the file will be loaded regardless of the owner or  file
mode.   This argument is intended to be used for testing purposes
and should not be enabled on production  systems.   The  argument
can  be used to override the default path to the file.  The argu-
ment can be used to override the default path to the  file.   The
argument  can  be  used to override the default path to the file.
The argument can be used to override the default owner of the su-
doers file.  It should be specified as a  numeric  user-ID.   The
argument can be used to override the default group of the sudoers
file.   It  must  be specified as a numeric group-ID (not a group
name).  The argument can be used to  override  the  default  file
mode  for  the  sudoers file.  It should be specified as an octal
value.  For more information on configuring refer to its  manual.
The  security  policy requires that most users authenticate them-
selves before they can use A password is not required if the  in-
voking  user  is  if  the target user is the same as the invoking
user, or if the policy has disabled authentication for  the  user
or  command.   Unlike  when requires authentication, it validates
the invoking user's credentials, not the target user's  (or  cre-
dentials.   This  can  be  changed  via  the and flags, described
later.  If a user who is not listed in the policy tries to run  a
command  via mail is sent to the proper authorities.  The address
used for such mail is configurable via the  Defaults  entry  (de-
scribed  later)  and defaults to No mail will be sent if an unau-
thorized user tries to run with the or option unless there is  an
authentication  error  and either the or flags are enabled.  This
allows users to determine for themselves whether or not they  are
allowed  to  use  By  default, all attempts to run (successful or
not) are logged, regardless of whether or not mail is  sent.   If
is  run  by  and the environment variable is set, the policy will
use this value to determine who the actual user is.  This can  be
used by a user to log commands through sudo even when a shell has
been  invoked.   It  also allows the option to remain useful even
when invoked via a sudo-run script or  program.   Note,  however,
that  the file lookup is still done for not the user specified by
uses per-user time stamp files for credential  caching.   Once  a
user  has  been authenticated, a record is written containing the
user-ID that was used to authenticate, the terminal  session  ID,
the  start  time  of the session leader (or parent process) and a
time stamp (using a monotonic clock if one  is  available).   The
user  may  then use without a password for a short period of time
(5 minutes unless overridden by the option).  By default, uses  a
separate  record for each terminal, which means that a user's lo-
gin sessions are authenticated separately.   The  option  can  be
used to select the type of time stamp record will use.  The util-
ity,  included  with the sudo source distribution, can be used to
display the contents of a time stamp file.  See  for  details  of
the time stamp file format.  By default, logs both successful and
unsuccessful  attempts (as well as errors).  The and flags can be
used to control this behavior.  Messages can be logged to  a  log
file, or both.  The default is to log to but this is configurable
via the and settings.  See for a description of the log file for-
mat.   is  also capable of running a command in a pseudo-terminal
and logging input and/or output.  The  standard  input,  standard
output, and standard error can be logged even when not associated
with a terminal.  For more information about I/O logging, see the
section.   Starting  with version 1.9, the setting may be used to
send event and I/O log data to a remote server running or another
service that implements the protocol described by Since  environ-
ment  variables  can influence program behavior, provides a means
to restrict which variables from the user's environment  are  in-
herited  by  the  command to be run.  There are two distinct ways
can deal with environment variables.  By default, the flag is en-
abled.  This causes commands to be executed with a  new,  minimal
environment.   On  AIX (and Linux systems without PAM), the envi-
ronment is initialized with the contents of the  file.   The  and
environment  variables  are  initialized based on the target user
and the variables are set based on the invoking user.  Additional
variables, such as and are preserved from the invoking user's en-
vironment if permitted by the  or  options.   A  few  environment
variables  are  treated  specially.  If the and variables are not
preserved from the user's environment, they will be  set  to  de-
fault values.  The and are handled as a single entity.  If one of
them  is  preserved (or removed) from the user's environment, the
other will be as well.  If and are to be preserved but  only  one
of  them  is present in the user's environment, the other will be
set to the same value.  This avoids an  inconsistent  environment
where one of the variables describing the user name is set to the
invoking  user  and  one  is set to the target user.  Environment
variables with a value beginning with are removed unless both the
name and value parts are matched by or as they may be interpreted
as functions by the shell.  Prior to version 1.8.11,  such  vari-
ables  were  always  removed.  If, however, the flag is disabled,
any variables not explicitly denied by the and  options  are  al-
lowed  and  their values are inherited from the invoking process.
Prior to version 1.8.21, environment variables with a  value  be-
ginning with were always removed.  Beginning with version 1.8.21,
a  pattern in is used to match shell functions instead.  Since it
is not possible to block all  potentially  dangerous  environment
variables,  use  of the default behavior is encouraged.  Environ-
ment variables specified by or may include one or more characters
which will match zero or  more  characters.   No  other  wildcard
characters  are supported.  By default, environment variables are
matched by name.  However, if the pattern includes an equal  sign
both  the  variables  name  and value must match.  For example, a
shell  function  could  be  matched  as  follows:   env_keep   +=
"BASH_FUNC_my_func%%=()*"  Without  the  suffix,  this  would not
match, as shell functions are not preserved by default.  The com-
plete list of environment variables that  are  preserved  or  re-
moved,  as modified by global Defaults parameters in is displayed
when is run by with the option.  The list  of  environment  vari-
ables  to  remove varies based on the operating system is running
on.  Other settings may influence the  command  environment:  op-
tions  such as and Command tags, such as and Note that is implied
if the command matched is options, such as and  On  systems  that
support  PAM where the module is enabled for variables in the PAM
environment may be merged in to the environment.  If  a  variable
in  the PAM environment is already present in the user's environ-
ment, the value will only be overridden if the variable  was  not
preserved by When is enabled, variables preserved from the invok-
ing  user's environment by the list take precedence over those in
the PAM environment.  When is disabled, variables present the in-
voking user's environment take precedence over those in  the  PAM
environment unless they match a pattern in the list.  The dynamic
linker  on  most operating systems will remove variables that can
control dynamic linking from the environment of set-user-ID  exe-
cutables,  including  Depending  on the operating system this may
include and others.  These type of variables are removed from the
environment before even begins execution and, as such, it is  not
possible  for to preserve them.  As a special case, if the option
(initial login) is specified, will initialize the environment re-
gardless of the value of The and variables remain unchanged;  and
are  set  based  on  the  target user.  On AIX (and Linux systems
without PAM), the contents of are also included.  All other envi-
ronment variables are removed unless permitted  by  or  described
above.   Finally,  the  and  files  are applied, if present.  The
variables in are applied first and are subject to  the  same  re-
strictions as the invoking user's environment, as detailed above.
The  variables  in  are applied last and are not subject to these
restrictions.  In both cases, variables present in the files will
only be set to their specified values if they would not  conflict
with  an  existing environment variable.  The file is composed of
two types of entries:  aliases  (basically  variables)  and  user
specifications  (which  specify who may run what).  When multiple
entries match for a user, they are applied in order.  Where there
are multiple matches, the last match is used (which is not neces-
sarily the most specific match).  The file grammar  will  be  de-
scribed below in Extended Backus-Naur Form (EBNF).  Don't despair
if you are unfamiliar with EBNF; it is fairly simple, and the de-
finitions  below  are  annotated.  By default, uses the operating
system's native method of setting resource limits for the  target
user.   On  Linux systems, resource limits are usually set by the
PAM module.  On some BSD systems,  the  file  specifies  resource
limits for the user.  On AIX systems, resource limits are config-
ured  in  the  file.  If there is no system mechanism to set per-
user resource limits, the command will run with the  same  limits
as the invoking user.  The one exception to this is the core dump
file size, which is set by to 0 by default.  Disabling core dumps
by default makes it possible to avoid potential security problems
where the core file is treated as trusted input.  Resource limits
may  also  be set in the file itself, in which case they override
those set by the system.  See the options described  below.   Re-
source  limits  in  may be specified in one of the following for-
mats: Both the soft and hard resource limits are set to the  same
value.   The special value can be used to indicate that the value
is unlimited.  Two comma-separated values.  The soft limit is set
to the first value and the hard limit is set to the second.  Both
values must either be enclosed in a set of double quotes, or  the
comma  must  be escaped with a backslash The special value may be
used in place of either value.  The default  resource  limit  for
the  user  will  be used.  This may be a user-specific value (see
above) or the value of the resource limit when  was  invoked  for
systems  that don't support per-user limits.  The invoking user's
resource limits will be preserved when running the command.   For
example,  to restore the historic core dump file size behavior, a
line like the following may be used.

Resource limits in are only supported by version 1.8.7 or higher.
EBNF is a concise and exact way of describing the  grammar  of  a
language.  Each EBNF definition is made up of For example: symbol
::=  definition  |  alternate1  | alternate2 ...  Each references
others and thus makes up a grammar for the language.   EBNF  also
contains  the following operators, which many readers will recog-
nize from regular expressions.  Do  not,  however,  confuse  them
with  characters,  which have different meanings.  Means that the
preceding symbol (or group of symbols) is optional.  That is,  it
may  appear  once or not at all.  Means that the preceding symbol
(or group of symbols) may appear zero or more times.  Means  that
the preceding symbol (or group of symbols) may appear one or more
times.   Parentheses  may be used to group symbols together.  For
clarity, we will use single quotes to designate what is a  verba-
tim  character  string  (as opposed to a symbol name).  There are
four kinds of aliases: and Beginning with 1.9.0, may be  used  in
place  of  if  desired.   Alias ::= 'User_Alias'  User_Alias_Spec
(':' User_Alias_Spec)* |
          'Runas_Alias' Runas_Alias_Spec (':'  Runas_Alias_Spec)*
|
          'Host_Alias'  Host_Alias_Spec (':' Host_Alias_Spec)* |
          'Cmnd_Alias'  Cmnd_Alias_Spec (':' Cmnd_Alias_Spec)* |
          'Cmd_Alias'   Cmnd_Alias_Spec (':' Cmnd_Alias_Spec)*

User_Alias ::= NAME

User_Alias_Spec ::= User_Alias '=' User_List

Runas_Alias ::= NAME

Runas_Alias_Spec ::= Runas_Alias '=' Runas_List

Host_Alias ::= NAME

Host_Alias_Spec ::= Host_Alias '=' Host_List

Cmnd_Alias ::= NAME

Cmnd_Alias_Spec ::= Cmnd_Alias '=' Cmnd_List

NAME  ::=  [A-Z]([A-Z][0-9]_)*  Each  definition  is  of the form
Alias_Type NAME = item1, item2, ...  where is one of or  A  is  a
string of uppercase letters, numbers, and underscore characters A
start  with  an  uppercase letter.  It is possible to put several
alias definitions of the same type on a single line, joined by  a
colon For example: Alias_Type NAME = item1, item2, item3 : NAME =
item4,  item5  It is a syntax error to redefine an existing It is
possible to use the same name for of different types, but this is
not recommended.  The definitions of  what  constitutes  a  valid
member follow.  User_List ::= User |
              User ',' User_List

User ::= '!'* user name |
         '!'* #user-ID |
         '!'* %group |
         '!'* %#group-ID |
         '!'* +netgroup |
         '!'* %:nonunix_group |
         '!'* %:#nonunix_gid |
         '!'*  User_Alias A is made up of one or more user names,
user-IDs (prefixed with system group names and IDs (prefixed with
and respectively), netgroups (prefixed with non-Unix group  names
and  IDs (prefixed with and respectively), and Each list item may
be prefixed with zero or more operators.  An odd number of opera-
tors negate the value of the item; an  even  number  just  cancel
each  other  out.   User netgroups are matched using the user and
domain members only; the host member is not used  when  matching.
A  or  may be enclosed in double quotes to avoid the need for es-
caping special characters.  Alternately, special  characters  may
be specified in escaped hex mode, e.g., \x20 for space.  When us-
ing  double quotes, any prefix characters must be included inside
the quotes.  The actual and  syntax  depends  on  the  underlying
group  provider plugin.  For instance, the QAS AD plugin supports
the following formats: Group in the same domain:  "%:Group  Name"
Group  in any domain: "%:Group Name@FULLY.QUALIFIED.DOMAIN" Group
SID:  "%:S-1-2-34-5678901234-5678901234-5678901234-567"  See  for
more  information.   Quotes around group names are optional.  Un-
quoted strings must use a backslash to escape spaces and  special
characters.   See  for  a  list of characters that need to be es-
caped.  Runas_List ::= Runas_Member |
               Runas_Member ',' Runas_List

Runas_Member ::= '!'* user name |
                 '!'* #user-ID |
                 '!'* %group |
                 '!'* %#group-ID |
                 '!'* %:nonunix_group |
                 '!'* %:#nonunix_gid |
                 '!'* +netgroup |
                 '!'* Runas_Alias |
                 '!'* ALL A is similar to a except  that  instead
of  it  can contain User names and groups are matched as strings.
In other words, two users (groups) with the same user (group)  ID
are  considered  to  be  distinct.  If you wish to match all user
names with the same user-ID (e.g., and you can use a user-ID  in-
stead of a name (#0 in the example given).  The user-ID or group-
ID  specified  in  a  need not be listed in the password or group
database.  Host_List ::= Host |
              Host ',' Host_List

Host ::= '!'* host name |
         '!'* ip_addr |
         '!'* network(/netmask)? |
         '!'* +netgroup |
         '!'* Host_Alias |
         '!'* ALL A is made up of one or more host names, IP  ad-
dresses,  network  numbers,  netgroups  (prefixed  with and other
aliases.  Again, the value of an item may be negated with the op-
erator.  Host netgroups are matched using the host  (both  quali-
fied and unqualified) and domain members only; the user member is
not  used when matching.  If you specify a network number without
a netmask, will query each of the local host's network interfaces
and, if the network number corresponds to one of the hosts's net-
work interfaces, will use the netmask  of  that  interface.   The
netmask  may  be specified either in standard IP address notation
(e.g., 255.255.255.0 or ffff:ffff:ffff:ffff::), or CIDR  notation
(number of bits, e.g., 24 or 64).  A host name may include shell-
style  wildcards  (see the section below), but unless the command
on your machine returns the fully  qualified  host  name,  you'll
need  to  use the flag for wildcards to be useful.  only inspects
actual network interfaces; this means that IP  address  127.0.0.1
(localhost)  will  never  match.   Also,  the host name will only
match if that is the actual host name, which is usually only  the
case for non-networked systems.  digest ::= [A-Fa-f0-9]+ |
           [A-Za-z0-9\+/=]+

Digest_Spec ::= "sha224" ':' digest |
                "sha256" ':' digest |
                "sha384" ':' digest |
                "sha512" ':' digest

Digest_List ::= Digest_Spec |
                Digest_Spec ',' Digest_List

Cmnd_List ::= Cmnd |
              Cmnd ',' Cmnd_List

command name ::= regex |
                 file name

command ::= command name |
            command name args |
            command name regex |
            command name '""' |
            ALL

Edit_Spec ::= "sudoedit" file name+ |
              "sudoedit" regex |
              "sudoedit"

List_Spec ::= "list"

Cmnd ::= Digest_List? '!'* command |
         '!'* directory |
         '!'* Edit_Spec |
         '!'* List_Spec |
         '!'* Cmnd_Alias A is a list of one or more commands, di-
rectories, or aliases.  A command is a fully qualified file name,
which  may include shell-style wildcards (see the section below),
or a regular expression that starts with and ends with  (see  the
section  below).  A directory is a fully qualified path name end-
ing in a When you specify a directory in a the user will be  able
to  run any file within that directory (but not in any sub-direc-
tories therein).  If no command line arguments are specified, the
user may run the command with any arguments they choose.  Command
line arguments can include wildcards or be a  regular  expression
that starts with and ends with If the command line arguments con-
sist of the command may only be run with arguments.  If a has as-
sociated  command line arguments, the arguments in the must match
those given by the user on the command line.  If the arguments in
a begin with the character, they will be interpreted as a regular
expression and matched accordingly.  Otherwise, shell-style wild-
cards are used when matching.  Unless  a  regular  expression  is
specified,  the  following  characters  must be escaped with a if
they are used in command arguments: To  prevent  arguments  in  a
that  begin  with a character from being interpreted as a regular
expression, the must be escaped with a  There  are  two  commands
built  into  itself: and Unlike other commands, these two must be
specified in the file a leading path.  The built-in can  be  used
to  permit  a user to list another user's privileges with option.
For example, A user with the privilege is able  to  list  another
user's  privileges even if they don't have permission to run com-
mands as that user.  By default, only root or  a  user  with  the
ability to run any command as either root or the specified on the
current  host  may use the option.  No command line arguments may
be specified with the built-in.  The built-in is used to permit a
user to run with the option (or as It may take command line argu-
ments just as a normal command does.  Unlike other  commands,  is
built  into  itself  and  must be specified in the file a leading
path.  If a leading path is present, for example  the  path  name
will  be  silently  converted  to  A  fully-qualified path for is
treated as an error by A may be preceded by a  a  comma-separated
list  of  one or more entries.  If a is present, the command will
only match successfully if it can be verified using  one  of  the
SHA-2  digests in the list.  Starting with version 1.9.0, the re-
served word can be used in conjunction with a The  following  di-
gest  formats  are supported: sha224, sha256, sha384, and sha512.
The string may be  specified  in  either  hex  or  base64  format
(base64 is more compact).  There are several utilities capable of
generating  SHA-2  digests in hex format such as openssl, shasum,
sha224sum, sha256sum, sha384sum, sha512sum.  For  example,  using
openssl:   $   openssl   dgst  -sha224  /bin/ls  SHA224(/bin/ls)=
118187da8364d490b4a7debbf483004e8f3e053ec954309de2c41a25  It   is
also possible to use openssl to generate base64 output: $ openssl
dgst     -binary     -sha224    /bin/ls    |    openssl    base64
EYGH2oNk1JC0p9679IMATo8+BT7JVDCd4sQaJQ== Warning, if the user has
write access to the command itself (directly or via  a  command),
it  may be possible for the user to replace the command after the
digest check has been performed but before the  command  is  exe-
cuted.   A similar race condition exists on systems that lack the
system call when the directory in which the command is located is
writable by the user.  See the description  of  the  setting  for
more information on how executes commands that have an associated
digest.   Command  digests are only supported by version 1.8.7 or
higher.  Certain configuration options may be changed from  their
default  values at run-time via one or more lines.  These may af-
fect all users on any host all users on a specific  host  a  spe-
cific user a specific command or commands being run as a specific
user  White space is not permitted between and the or characters.
While a comma-separated list may be used in  place  of  a  single
value after the or character, using an alias instead of a list is
often  improve  readability.  Per-command entries may not include
command line arguments.  If you need to specify arguments, define
a and reference that instead.  Default_Type ::= 'Defaults' |
                 'Defaults@' Host_List |
                 'Defaults:' User_List |
                 'Defaults!' Cmnd_List |
                 'Defaults>' Runas_List

Default_Entry ::= Default_Type Parameter_List

Parameter_List ::= Parameter |
                   Parameter ',' Parameter_List

Parameter ::= Parameter '=' Value |
              Parameter '+=' Value |
              Parameter '-=' Value |
              '!'* Parameter Parameters may be values,  or  Flags
are  implicitly  boolean  and can be turned off via the operator.
Some integer, string and list parameters may also be  used  in  a
boolean  context to disable them.  Values may be enclosed in dou-
ble quotes when they contain multiple words.  Special  characters
may  be  escaped  with a backslash To include a literal backslash
character in a command line argument you must  escape  the  back-
slash twice.  For example, to match as part of a command line ar-
gument, you must use in the file.  This is due to there being two
levels  of  escaping,  one  in the parser itself and another when
command line arguments are matched by  the  or  function.   Lists
have two additional assignment operators, and These operators are
used to add to and delete from a list respectively.  It is not an
error  to use the operator to remove an element that does not ex-
ist in a list.  In general Defaults settings are applied  in  or-
der, later entries will override earlier ones.  However, command-
specific  Defaults settings are applied later, once the command's
path is known.  In addition, the following Defaults settings must
be applied before all others since they may affect subsequent en-
tries:  See  for  a  list  of  supported   Defaults   parameters.
User_Spec ::= User_List Host_List '=' Cmnd_Spec_List \
              (':' Host_List '=' Cmnd_Spec_List)*

Cmnd_Spec_List ::= Cmnd_Spec |
                   Cmnd_Spec ',' Cmnd_Spec_List

Cmnd_Spec ::= Runas_Spec? Option_Spec* (Tag_Spec ':')* Cmnd

Runas_Spec ::= '(' Runas_List? (':' Runas_List)? ')'

Option_Spec  ::=  (Date_Spec  |  Timeout_Spec  | Chdir_Spec | Ch-
root_Spec)

Date_Spec ::= ('NOTBEFORE=timestamp' | 'NOTAFTER=timestamp')

Timeout_Spec ::= 'TIMEOUT=timeout'

Chdir_Spec ::= 'CWD=directory'

Chroot_Spec ::= 'CHROOT=directory'

Tag_Spec ::= ('EXEC' | 'NOEXEC' | 'FOLLOW' | 'NOFOLLOW' |
              'LOG_INPUT' | 'NOLOG_INPUT' | 'LOG_OUTPUT' |
              'NOLOG_OUTPUT' | 'MAIL' | 'NOMAIL' | 'INTERCEPT' |
              'NOINTERCEPT' | 'PASSWD' | 'NOPASSWD' | 'SETENV' |
              'NOSETENV') A determines which commands a user  may
run  (and as what user) on specified hosts.  By default, commands
are run as (unless has been set to a different  value)  but  this
can  also be changed on a per-command basis.  The basic structure
of a user specification is Let's break that down  into  its  con-
stituent  parts:  A  determines  the user and/or the group that a
command may be run as.  A fully-specified consists of two (as de-
fined above) separated by a colon and enclosed in a set of paren-
theses.  The first indicates which users the command may  be  run
as  via the option.  The second defines a list of groups that may
be specified via the option (in addition to  any  of  the  target
user's  groups).   If  both are specified, the command may be run
with any combination of users and groups listed in their  respec-
tive  If  only  the first is specified, the command may be run as
any user in the list and, optionally, with any group  the  target
user  belongs to.  If the first is empty but the second is speci-
fied, the command may be run as the invoking user with the  group
set  to any listed in the If both are empty, the command may only
be run as the invoking user and the group, if specified, must  be
one  that  the invoking user is a member of.  If no is specified,
the command may only be run as  the  user  by  default)  and  the
group, if specified, must be one that the user is a member of.  A
sets  the  default  for  the  commands that follow it.  What this
means  is  that  for  the  entry:  dgb     boulder  =  (operator)
/bin/ls,  /bin/kill,  /usr/bin/lprm  The  user may run and on the
host only as For example: $ sudo -u operator /bin/ls It  is  also
possible  to  override  a later on in an entry.  If we modify the
entry like  so:  dgb     boulder  =  (operator)  /bin/ls,  (root)
/bin/kill,  /usr/bin/lprm  Then user is now allowed to run as but
and as We can extend this to allow to run with either the user or
group set to dgb     boulder =  (operator  :  operator)  /bin/ls,
(root)  /bin/kill,\         /usr/bin/lprm While the group portion
of the permits the user to run as command  with  that  group,  it
does  not  force  the user to do so.  If no group is specified on
the command line, the command will run with the group  listed  in
the  target  user's password database entry.  The following would
all be permitted by the sudoers entry above: $ sudo  -u  operator
/bin/ls $ sudo -u operator -g operator /bin/ls $ sudo -g operator
/bin/ls  In the following example, user may run commands that ac-
cess a modem device file with the dialer group.   tcm     boulder
=    (:dialer)   /usr/bin/tip,   /usr/bin/cu,\           /usr/lo-
cal/bin/minicom In this example only the group will be  set,  the
command  still  runs  as  user  For  example:  $  sudo  -g dialer
/usr/bin/cu Multiple users and groups may  be  present  in  a  in
which  case  the  user  may  select  any combination of users and
groups via the and  options.   In  this  example:  alan    ALL  =
(root,  bin  :  operator, system) ALL user may run any command as
either user or optionally setting the group to operator  or  sys-
tem.   A  may  have zero or more options associated with it.  Op-
tions may consist of start and/or end dates and command timeouts.
Once an option is set for a subsequent in the inherit that option
unless it is overridden by another option.  Option names are  re-
served  words  in  This means that none of the valid option names
(see below) can be used when declaring an alias.   rules  can  be
specified  with  a  start and end date via the and settings.  The
time stamp must be specified in as defined by RFC 4517.  The for-
mat is effectively where the minutes and  seconds  are  optional.
The  suffix  indicates that the time stamp is in Coordinated Uni-
versal Time (UTC).  It is also possible  to  specify  a  timezone
offset  from  UTC  in hours and minutes instead of a For example,
would correspond to Eastern Standard time in the US.  As  an  ex-
tension,  if  no or timezone offset is specified, local time will
be  used.    The   following   are   all   valid   time   stamps:
20170214083000Z  2017021408Z 20160315220000-0500 20151201235900 A
command may have a timeout associated with it.   If  the  timeout
expires before the command has exited, the command will be termi-
nated.   The  timeout  may  be specified in combinations of days,
hours, minutes, and seconds with a single-letter case-insensitive
suffix that indicates the unit of time.  For example,  a  timeout
of  7  days, 8 hours, 30 minutes, and 10 seconds would be written
as If a number is specified without a unit, seconds are  assumed.
Any  of the days, minutes, hours, or seconds may be omitted.  The
order must be from largest to smallest unit and a unit may not be
specified more than once.  The following are all timeout  values:
The  following are timeout values: This setting is only supported
by version 1.8.20 or higher.  The working directory that the com-
mand will be run in can be specified using the setting.  The must
be a fully-qualified path name beginning with a or character,  or
the  special value A value of indicates that the user may specify
the working directory by running with the  option.   By  default,
commands  are run from the invoking user's current working direc-
tory, unless the option is given.  Path names of the form are in-
terpreted as being relative to the named user's  home  directory.
If  the  user  name  is omitted, the path will be relative to the
runas user's home directory.  This setting is only  supported  by
version  1.9.3 or higher.  Support for setting the root directory
is deprecated and will be removed in a future version of The root
directory that the command will be run in can be specified  using
the  setting.   The must be a fully-qualified path name beginning
with a or character, or the special value A  value  of  indicates
that  the user may specify the root directory by running with the
option.  This setting can be used to run the command in a similar
to the utility.  Path names of the form are interpreted as  being
relative to the named user's home directory.  If the user name is
omitted,  the  path will be relative to the runas user's home di-
rectory.  This setting is only  supported  by  version  1.9.3  or
higher.  A command may have zero or more tags associated with it.
The  following tag values are supported: and Once a tag is set on
a subsequent in the inherit the tag unless it  is  overridden  by
the opposite tag (in other words, overrides and overrides

If  has  been  compiled with support and the underlying operating
system supports it, the tag can be used to prevent a dynamically-
linked executable from running further commands itself.   In  the
following example, user may run and on the host shanty, but shell
escapes    will    be   disabled.    aaron   shanty   =   NOEXEC:
/usr/bin/more, /usr/bin/vi See the section below for more details
on how works and whether or not it will work on your system.

Starting with version 1.8.15, will not open a file that is a sym-
bolic link unless the flag is enabled.  The and tags override the
value of and can be used to permit (or deny) the editing of  sym-
bolic  links  on a per-command basis.  These tags are only effec-
tive for the command and are ignored for all other commands.

These tags override the value of the flag on a per-command basis.
For more information, see

These tags override the value of the flag on a per-command basis.
For more information, see

These tags provide fine-grained control over whether mail will be
sent when a user runs a command by overriding the  value  of  the
flag  on  a  per-command  basis.  They have no effect when is run
with the or options.  A tag will also override the  and  options.
For  more information, see the descriptions of and in the section
below.

By default, requires that a user authenticate  before  running  a
command.   This behavior can be modified via the tag.  Like a the
tag sets a default for the commands that follow it  in  the  Con-
versely,  the  tag  can  be used to reverse things.  For example:
ray     rushmore = NOPASSWD:  /bin/kill,  /bin/ls,  /usr/bin/lprm
would allow the user to run and as on the machine without authen-
ticating  himself.   If  we only want to be able to run without a
password  the  entry  would  be:  ray     rushmore  =   NOPASSWD:
/bin/kill, PASSWD: /bin/ls, /usr/bin/lprm Note, however, that the
tag  has no effect on users who are in the group specified by the
setting.  By default, if the tag is applied to any  of  a  user's
entries  for the current host, the user will be able to run with-
out a password.  Additionally, a user  may  only  run  without  a
password  if  all of the user's entries for the current host have
the tag.  This behavior may be overridden via the and options.

These tags override the value of the flag on a per-command basis.
If has been set for a command, the user may disable the flag from
the command line via the option.  Additionally, environment vari-
ables set on the command line are not subject to the restrictions
imposed by or As such, only trusted users should  be  allowed  to
set  variables in this manner.  If the command matched is the tag
is implied for that command; this default may  be  overridden  by
use of the tag.

If  has  been  compiled with support and the underlying operating
system supports it, the tag can be used to cause programs spawned
by a command to be validated against and logged  just  like  they
would  be if run through directly.  This is useful in conjunction
with commands that allow shell escapes such as  editors,  shells,
and  paginators.   There is additional overhead due to the policy
check that may add latency when running commands  such  as  shell
scripts  that execute a large number of sub-commands.  For inter-
active commands, such as a shell or editor, the overhead  is  not
usually  noticeable.   In the following example, user may run any
command on the machine in intercept mode.  chuck   research = IN-
TERCEPT: ALL See the section below for more details on how  works
and  whether  or  not it will work on your system.  allows shell-
style (aka meta or glob characters) to be  used  in  host  names,
path  names,  and  command  line arguments in the file.  Wildcard
matching is done via the and functions as  specified  by  Matches
any  set  of  zero  or  more  characters (including white space).
Matches any single character (including  white  space).   Matches
any  character  in the specified range.  Matches any character in
the specified range.  For any character evaluates to This is used
to escape special characters such as: and These are  not  regular
expressions.   Unlike  a  regular  expression  there is no way to
match one or more characters within a range.   Character  classes
may  be  used  if your system's and functions support them.  How-
ever, because the character has special meaning in it must be es-
caped.  For example: /bin/ls [[\:alpha\:]]* Would match any  file
name beginning with a letter.  A forward slash will be matched by
wildcards  used in the file name portion of the command.  This is
to make a path like: /usr/bin/* match but not When  matching  the
command line arguments, however, a slash get matched by wildcards
since  command  line  arguments may contain arbitrary strings and
not just path names.  Wildcards in command line arguments  should
be used with care.
Wildcards  can  match  any  character, including white space.  In
most cases, it is safer to use a regular expression to match com-
mand line arguments.  For more information, see below.  The  fol-
lowing  exceptions  apply to the above rules: If the empty string
is the only command line argument in the file entry it means that
command is not allowed to be run with  arguments.   Command  line
arguments to the built-in command should always be path names, so
a forward slash will not be matched by a wildcard.  Starting with
version  1.9.10,  it  is  possible to use regular expressions for
path names and command line arguments.  Regular  expressions  are
more  expressive  than  shell-style and are usually safer because
they provide a greater degree of control when matching.  The type
of regular expressions supported by are  POSIX  extended  regular
expressions, similar to those used by the utility.  They are usu-
ally documented in the or manual, depending on the system.  As an
extension,  if  the  regular  expression  begins  with it will be
matched in a case-insensitive  manner.   In  regular  expressions
must start with a character and end with a This makes it explicit
what  is, or is not, a regular expression.  Either the path name,
the command line arguments or both may  be  regular  expressions.
Because the path name and arguments are matched separately, it is
even  possible to use wildcards for the path name and regular ex-
pressions for the arguments.  It is not possible to use a  single
regular  expression  to match both the command and its arguments.
Regular expressions in are limited to 1024 characters.  There  is
no  need  to  escape  special  characters in a regular expression
other than the pound sign In the following example, user can  run
the command as on any host but is not allowed to change password.
This  kind  of  rule  is impossible to express safely using wild-
cards.  john    ALL = /usr/bin/passwd ^[a-zA-Z0-9_]+$,\
              !/usr/bin/passwd root It is also possible to use  a
regular expression in conjunction with rules.  The following rule
would  give user bob the ability to edit the and files only.  bob
ALL = sudoedit ^/etc/(motd|issue|hosts)$ Regular expressions  may
also  be  used  to  match the command itself.  In this example, a
regular expression is used to allow user to run the and  commands
as  sid    ALL = ^/usr/sbin/(group|user)(add|mod|del)$ One disad-
vantage of using a regular expression to match the  command  name
is  that  it  is  not possible to match relative paths such as or
This has security implications when a regular expression is  used
for  the  command name in conjunction with the negation operator,
as such rules can be trivially bypassed.  Because of this,  using
a  negated  regular  expression for the command name is This does
not apply to negated commands that only use a regular  expression
to  match the command arguments.  See below for more information.
It is possible to include other files from within the  file  cur-
rently  being parsed using the and directives.  For compatibility
with sudo versions prior to 1.9.1, and are also accepted.  An in-
clude file can be used, for example, to keep a site-wide file  in
addition  to a local, per-machine file.  For the sake of this ex-
ample the site-wide file will be and the per-machine one will  be
To  include  from within one would use the following line in @in-
clude /etc/sudoers.local When reaches this line it  will  suspend
processing  of  the  current file and switch to Upon reaching the
end of the rest of will be processed.  Files  that  are  included
may  themselves  include other files.  A hard limit of 128 nested
include files is enforced to prevent include file loops.   Start-
ing  with version 1.9.1, the path to the include file may contain
white space if it is escaped with a  backslash  Alternately,  the
entire path may be enclosed in double quotes in which case no es-
caping is necessary.  To include a literal backslash in the path,
should  be  used.   If the path to the include file is not fully-
qualified (does not begin with a it must be located in  the  same
directory as the sudoers file it was included from.  For example,
if  contains  the line: @include sudoers.local the file that will
be included is The file name may also include the escape,  signi-
fying  the  short  form of the host name.  In other words, if the
machine's host name is then @include /etc/sudoers.%h  will  cause
to include the file Any path name separator characters present in
the host name will be replaced with an underbar during expansion.
The  directive  can be used to create a directory that the system
package manager can drop file rules into as part of  package  in-
stallation.   For example, given: @includedir /etc/sudoers.d will
suspend processing of the current file  and  read  each  file  in
skipping  file  names that end in or contain a character to avoid
causing problems with package manager or editor  temporary/backup
files.   Files are parsed in sorted lexical order.  That is, will
be parsed before Be aware that because the  sorting  is  lexical,
not numeric, would be loaded Using a consistent number of leading
zeroes in the file names can be used to avoid such problems.  Af-
ter  parsing  the  files in the directory, control returns to the
file that contained the directive.   Unlike  files  included  via
will  not  edit  the files in a directory unless one of them con-
tains a syntax error.  It is still possible to run with the  flag
to edit the files directly, but this will not catch the redefini-
tion  of  an that is also present in a different file.  The pound
sign is used to indicate a comment (unless it is part of  a  #in-
clude directive or unless it occurs in the context of a user name
and  is  followed  by  one  or  more  digits, in which case it is
treated as a user-ID).  Both the comment character and  any  text
after  it,  up to the end of the line, are ignored.  The reserved
word is a built-in that always causes a match to succeed.  It can
be used wherever one might otherwise use a or Attempting  to  de-
fine  an  named will result in a syntax error.  Using can be dan-
gerous since in a command context, it allows the user to run com-
mand on the system.  The following option names permitted  in  an
are  also  considered reserved words: and Attempting to define an
with the same name as one of the options will result in a  syntax
error.  An exclamation point can be used as a logical operator in
a  list  or  as  well as in front of a This allows one to exclude
certain values.  For the operator to be effective, there must  be
something for it to exclude.  For example, to match all users ex-
cept  for  one  would  use:  ALL, !root If the is omitted, as in:
!root it would explicitly deny but not  match  any  other  users.
This  is different from a true operator.  Note, however, that us-
ing a in conjunction with the built-in alias to allow a  user  to
run  commands  rarely  works as intended (see below).  Long lines
can be continued with a backslash as the last  character  on  the
line.   White space between elements in a list as well as special
syntactic characters in a is optional.  The following  characters
must  be  escaped  with  a  backslash when used as part of a word
(e.g., a user name or host name): behavior  can  be  modified  by
lines,  as  explained  earlier.  A list of all supported Defaults
parameters, grouped by type, are listed below.  If a  is  config-
ured,  use  it  to resolve groups of the form as long as there is
not also a system group of the same name.  Normally, only  groups
of  the  form  are passed to the This flag is by default.  If en-
abled, will set the environment variable to the home directory of
the target user (which is the user unless the  option  is  used).
This  flag  is largely obsolete and has no effect unless the flag
has been disabled or is present in the list, both  of  which  are
strongly  discouraged.   This  flag is by default.  If set, users
must authenticate themselves via a password (or  other  means  of
authentication)  before  they may run commands.  This default may
be overridden via the and tags.  This flag is by default.  If en-
abled, group names in will be matched in a case insensitive  man-
ner.   This may be necessary when users are stored in LDAP or AD.
This flag is by default.  If  enabled,  user  names  in  will  be
matched in a case insensitive manner.  This may be necessary when
groups  are  stored  in LDAP or AD.  This flag is by default.  If
set, the user may use the  option  which  overrides  the  default
starting  point  at  which  begins closing open file descriptors.
This flag is by default.  If set, and is configured to log a com-
mand's input or output, the I/O logs  will  be  compressed  using
This  flag  is  by default when is compiled with support.  By de-
fault, runs a command as the foreground process as long as itself
is running in the foreground.  When the flag is enabled  and  the
command  is being run in a pseudo-terminal (due to I/O logging or
the flag), the command will be run as a background process.   At-
tempts to read from the controlling terminal (or to change termi-
nal settings) will result in the command being suspended with the
signal  (or  in  the case of terminal settings).  If this happens
when is a foreground process, the command  will  be  granted  the
controlling  terminal  and resumed in the foreground with no user
intervention required.  The advantage of  initially  running  the
command in the background is that need not read from the terminal
unless the command explicitly requests it.  Otherwise, any termi-
nal  input must be passed to the command, whether it has required
it or not (the kernel buffers terminals so it is not possible  to
tell  whether  the command really wants the input).  This is dif-
ferent from historic behavior or when the command  is  not  being
run in a pseudo-terminal.  For this to work seamlessly, the oper-
ating  system  must  support  the  automatic restarting of system
calls.  Unfortunately, not all operating systems do this  by  de-
fault,  and even those that do may have bugs.  For example, macOS
fails to restart the and functions (this  is  a  bug  in  macOS).
Furthermore,  because  this behavior depends on the command stop-
ping with the or signals, programs that catch these  signals  and
suspend  themselves  with a different signal (usually will not be
automatically foregrounded.  Some versions of the  linux  command
behave  this way.  This flag is by default.  This setting is only
supported by version 1.8.7 or higher.  It has  no  effect  unless
I/O  logging is enabled or the flag is enabled.  If set, will use
the value of the or environment variables before falling back  on
the  default  editor  list.  is typically run as so this flag may
allow a user with privileges to run arbitrary commands as without
logging.  An alternative is to place a  colon-separated  list  of
editors  int  the setting.  will then only use or if they match a
value specified in If the flag is enabled, the and/or environment
variables must be present in the list for the  flag  to  function
when  is  invoked  via This flag is by default.  If set, will run
the command in a minimal environment  containing  the  and  vari-
ables.   Any variables in the caller's environment or in the file
specified by the setting that match the and lists are then added,
followed by any variables present in the file  specified  by  the
setting  (if any).  The contents of the and lists, as modified by
global Defaults parameters in are displayed when is run  by  with
the  option.   If  the setting is enabled, its value will be used
for the environment variable.  This flag  is  by  default.   Nor-
mally, uses the function to do shell-style globbing when matching
path names.  However, since it accesses the file system, can take
a  long  time  to complete for some patterns, especially when the
pattern references a network file system that is mounted  on  de-
mand  (auto mounted).  The flag causes to use the function, which
does not access the file system to do its matching.   The  disad-
vantage  of  is that it is unable to match relative paths such as
or This has security implications when path  names  that  include
globbing  characters are used with the negation operator, as such
rules can be trivially bypassed.  As such, this flag  should  not
be  used  when  the file contains rules that contain negated path
names which include globbing characters.  This  flag  is  by  de-
fault.  Most programs that require a user's password will disable
echo  before  reading the password to avoid displaying the plain-
text password on the screen.  However, if terminal input is being
logged (see the password will still be present in  the  I/O  log.
If the option is disabled, will attempt to prevent passwords from
being  logged.   It does this by using the regular expressions in
to match a password prompt in the terminal output buffer.  When a
match is found, input characters in the I/O log will be  replaced
with  until either a line feed or carriage return is found in the
terminal input or a new terminal output buffer is received.   If,
however, a program displays characters as the user types (such as
when  is  set),  only the first character of the password will be
replaced in the I/O log.  This option has no effect unless or are
also set.  This flag is by default.  This setting  is  only  sup-
ported by version 1.9.10 or higher.  Set this flag if you want to
put  fully  qualified  host names in the file when the local host
name (as returned by the command) does  not  contain  the  domain
name.  In other words, instead of myhost you would use myhost.my-
domain.edu.   You  may  still use the short form if you wish (and
even mix the two).  This flag is only  effective  when  the  host
name, as returned by the or function, is a fully-qualified domain
name.   This is usually the case when the system is configured to
use DNS for host name resolution.  If the system is configured to
use the file in preference to DNS,  the  host  name  may  not  be
fully-qualified.   The  order  that  sources are queried for host
name resolution is usually specified in the or,  in  some  cases,
file.   In  the file, the first host name of the entry is consid-
ered to be the name; subsequent names are aliases  that  are  not
used  by  For  example, the following hosts file line for the ma-
chine has the fully-qualified domain name as the host  name,  and
the short version as an alias.


If  the machine's hosts file entry is not formatted properly, the
flag will not be effective if it is queried before  DNS.   Beware
that when using DNS for host name resolution, turning on requires
to  make  DNS lookups which renders unusable if DNS stops working
(for example if the machine is disconnected  from  the  network).
Just like with the hosts file, you must use the name as DNS knows
it.   That  is, you may not use a host alias (CNAME entry) due to
performance issues and the fact that there is no way to  get  all
aliases from DNS.  This flag is by default.  Allow commands to be
run  even if cannot write to the audit log.  If enabled, an audit
log write failure is not treated as a fatal error.  If  disabled,
a  command  may only be run after the audit event is successfully
written.  This flag is only effective on systems for  which  sup-
ports  audit  logging, including Linux, macOS, and Solaris.  This
flag is by default.  If set, will ignore "." or "" (both denoting
the current directory) in the environment variable; the itself is
not modified.  This flag is by default.  Allow commands to be run
even if cannot write to the I/O log (local or  remote).   If  en-
abled,  an I/O log write failure is not treated as a fatal error.
If disabled, the command will be terminated if the I/O log cannot
be written to.  This flag is by default.  Allow  commands  to  be
run even if cannot write to the log file.  If enabled, a log file
write  failure  is  not treated as a fatal error.  If disabled, a
command may only be run after the log file entry is  successfully
written.   This flag only has an effect when is configured to use
file-based logging via the setting.  This flag is by default.  If
set via LDAP, parsing of will be skipped.  This is  intended  for
sites  that  wish  to prevent the usage of local sudoers files so
that only LDAP is used.  This thwarts the efforts of rogue opera-
tors who would attempt to add roles to When this flag is enabled,
does not even need to exist.  Since this flag tells how to behave
when no specific LDAP entries have been matched, this  sudoOption
is only meaningful for the section.  This flag is by default.  If
set,  will  not produce a warning if it encounters an unknown De-
faults entry in the file or an unknown sudoOption in LDAP.   This
flag is by default.  If set, will insult users when they enter an
incorrect  password.   This flag is by default.  If set, will log
commands allowed by the policy to the  system  audit  log  (where
supported)  as well as to syslog and/or a log file.  This flag is
by default.  This setting is only supported by version 1.8.29  or
higher.   If  set,  will log commands denied by the policy to the
system audit log (where supported) as well as to syslog and/or  a
log  file.   This  flag is by default.  This setting is only sup-
ported by version 1.8.29 or higher.  If set, will  log  the  exit
value of commands that are run to syslog and/or a log file.  If a
command  was terminated by a signal, the signal name is logged as
well.  This flag is by default.  This setting is  only  supported
by  version  1.9.8  or higher.  If set, the host name will be in-
cluded in log entries written to the file configured by the  set-
ting.   This flag is by default.  If set, will run the command in
a pseudo-terminal (if was run from a terminal) and log  all  user
input.  If the standard input is not connected to the user's ter-
minal, due to I/O redirection or because the command is part of a
pipeline,  that input is also logged.  For more information about
I/O logging, see the section.  This flag is by default.  If  set,
will run the command in a pseudo-terminal (if was run from a ter-
minal)  and  log  all output that is sent to the user's terminal,
the standard output or the standard error.  If the standard  out-
put  or  standard  error is not connected to the user's terminal,
due to I/O redirection or  because  the  command  is  part  of  a
pipeline, that output is also logged.  For more information about
I/O  logging, see the section.  This flag is by default.  If set,
will enable the TCP keepalive socket option on the connection  to
the  log  server.   This  enables  the  periodic  transmission of
keepalive messages to the server.  If the server does not respond
to a message, the connection will be closed and the running  com-
mand  will be terminated unless the flag (I/O logging enabled) or
the flag (I/O logging disabled) is set.  This flag is by default.
This setting is only supported by version 1.9.0  or  higher.   If
set,  the  server  certificate  received during the TLS handshake
must be valid and it must contain either the server name (from or
its IP address.  If either of these conditions is  not  met,  the
TLS  handshake will fail.  This flag is by default.  This setting
is only supported by version 1.9.0 or higher.  If set,  will  log
the standard error if it is not connected to the user's terminal.
This can be used to log output to a pipe or redirected to a file.
This  flag  is  by default but is enabled when either the flag or
the command tag is set.  If set, will log the standard  input  if
it  is not connected to the user's terminal.  This can be used to
log input from a pipe or redirected from a file.  This flag is by
default but is enabled when either the flag or the command tag is
set.  If set, will log the standard output if it is not connected
to the user's terminal.  This can be used to log output to a pipe
or redirected to a file.  This flag is by default but is  enabled
when either the flag or the command tag is set.  If set, will log
when  a command spawns a child process and executes a program us-
ing the or library functions.  For example, if a shell is run  by
the  individual  commands run via the shell will be logged.  This
flag is by default.  The flag uses the same underlying  mechanism
as  the setting.  Some commands may not work properly when is en-
abled, due to the way it intercepts sub-commands.  See  for  more
information  on  what systems support this option and its limita-
tions.  This setting is only supported by version 1.9.8 or higher
and is incompatible with SELinux RBAC support unless  the  system
supports  filter mode.  If set, will run the command in a pseudo-
terminal and log user keystrokes sent to the user's terminal,  if
one  is present.  This flag is by default but is enabled when ei-
ther the flag or the command tag  is  set.   If  no  terminal  is
present,  for  example  when  running a remote command using this
flag will have no effect.  If set, will  run  the  command  in  a
pseudo-terminal and log all output displayed on the user's termi-
nal,  if  one is present.  This flag is by default but is enabled
when either the flag or the command tag is set.  If  no  terminal
is  present, for example when running a remote command using this
flag will have no effect.  If set, the four-digit  year  will  be
logged  in  the  (non-syslog) log file.  This flag is by default.
When validating with a One Time Password (OTP) scheme such as  or
a  two-line prompt is used to make it easier to cut and paste the
challenge to a local window.  It's not as pretty as  the  default
but  some  people  find  it more convenient.  This flag is by de-
fault.  Send mail to the user every time a user attempts to run a
command via (this includes No mail will be sent if the user  runs
with  the  or  option unless there is an authentication error and
the flag is also set.  This flag is by default.  Send mail to the
user every time a user runs This flag is by default.   Send  mail
to  the user if the user running does not enter the correct pass-
word.  If the command the user is attempting to run is  not  per-
mitted by and one of the or flags are set, this flag will have no
effect.   This  flag is by default.  If set, mail will be sent to
the user if the invoking user exists in the file, but is not  al-
lowed  to  run commands on the current host.  This flag is by de-
fault.  If set, mail will be sent to the  user  if  the  invoking
user  is  allowed  to  use but the command they are trying is not
listed in their file entry or is explicitly denied.  This flag is
by default.  If set, mail will be sent to the user if the  invok-
ing  user  is  not in the file.  This flag is by default.  By de-
fault, will look up each group the user is a member of by  group-
ID to determine the group name (this is only done once).  The re-
sulting  list  of  the  user's  group names is used when matching
groups listed in the file.  This works well on systems where  the
number  of groups listed in the file is larger than the number of
groups a typical user belongs to.  On systems where group lookups
are slow, where users may belong to a large number of groups,  or
where  the  number  of  groups  listed  in the file is relatively
small, it may be prohibitively expensive and running commands via
may take longer than normal.  On such systems it may be faster to
use the flag to avoid resolving the  user's  group-IDs  to  group
names.   In  this case, must look up any group name listed in the
file and use the group-ID instead of the group name  when  deter-
mining whether the user is a member of the group.  If is enabled,
group  database  lookups performed by will be keyed by group name
as opposed to group-ID.  On  systems  where  there  are  multiple
sources  for the group database, it is possible to have conflict-
ing group names or group-IDs in the local  file  and  the  remote
group  database.   On  such systems, enabling or disabling can be
used to choose whether group database queries  are  performed  by
name  (enabled) or ID (disabled), which may aid in working around
group entry conflicts.  The flag  has  no  effect  when  data  is
stored  in  LDAP.  This flag is by default.  This setting is only
supported by version 1.8.18 or higher.  If set, all commands  run
via  will behave as if the tag has been set, unless overridden by
an tag.  Some commands may not work properly when is enabled, due
to the way it intercept sub-commands.   See  the  description  of
above  as  well  as  the section at the end of this manual.  This
flag is by default.  This setting is only  supported  by  version
1.9.8 or higher and is incompatible with SELinux RBAC support un-
less  the  system supports filter mode.  On most systems, the dy-
namic loader will ignore (or the equivalent)  when  running  set-
user-ID  and  set-group-ID programs, effectively disabling inter-
cept mode.  To prevent this from happening,  will  not  permit  a
set-user-ID  or  set-group-ID program to be run in intercept mode
unless is enable.  This flag has no effect unless the flag is en-
abled or the tag has been set for the command.  This flag  is  by
default  when  the  option is set to otherwise it default to This
setting is only supported by version 1.9.8 or  higher.   If  set,
commands run by an intercepted process must be authenticated when
the user's time stamp is not current.  For example, if a shell is
run  with  enabled,  as soon as the invoking user's time stamp is
out of date, subsequent commands will need to  be  authenticated.
This flag has no effect unless the flag is enabled or the tag has
been set for the command.  This flag is by default.  This setting
is  only  supported by version 1.9.8 or higher.  If set, will at-
tempt to verify that a command run in intercept mode has the  ex-
pected  path  name,  command line arguments and environment.  The
process will be stopped after has completed but  before  the  new
command  has  had  a  chance to run.  To verify the command, will
read the command's path from the command line arguments and envi-
ronment from the process's memory, and compare them  against  the
arguments  that  were  passed  to In the event of a mismatch, the
command will be sent a signal and terminated.  This can help pre-
vent a time of check versus time of use issue with intercept mode
where the arguments could be altered after the policy check.  The
checks can only be performed if the  file  system  is  available.
This flag has no effect unless the flag is enabled or the tag has
been set for the command and the option is set to This setting is
incompatible  with  programs that change their root directory via
If a program changes its  root  directory,  path  names  will  no
longer  match  those  seen by the parent process and sub-commands
will be terminated before they have a chance to run.   This  flag
is  by default.  This setting is only supported by version 1.9.12
or higher.  If set, netgroup lookups will be performed using  the
full  netgroup tuple: host name, user name, and domain (if one is
set).  Historically, only matched the user name  and  domain  for
netgroups used in a and only matched the host name and domain for
netgroups  used  in  a This flag is by default.  If set, all com-
mands run via will behave as if the  tag  has  been  set,  unless
overridden  by  an  tag.  See the description of above as well as
the section at the end of this manual.  This flag is by  default.
If  set, authentication will be attempted even in non-interactive
mode (when option  is  specified).   This  allows  authentication
methods  that don't require user interaction to succeed.  Authen-
tication methods that require input from the user's terminal will
still fail.  If disabled, authentication will not be attempted in
non-interactive mode.  This flag is by default.  This setting  is
only  supported by version 1.9.10 or higher.  On systems that use
PAM for authentication, will perform PAM account  validation  for
the invoking user by default.  The actual checks performed depend
on which PAM modules are configured.  If enabled, account valida-
tion will be performed regardless of whether or not a password is
required.   This  flag  is by default.  This setting is only sup-
ported by version 1.8.28 or higher.  On systems that use PAM  for
authentication, will set the PAM remote host value to the name of
the  local  host when the flag is enabled.  On Linux systems, en-
abling may result in DNS lookups of the local host name when  PAM
is  initialized.  On Solaris versions prior to Solaris 8, must be
enabled if is also enabled to avoid a crash in  the  Solaris  PAM
implementation.   This  flag  is by default on systems other than
Solaris.  This setting is only  supported  by  version  1.9.0  or
higher.  On systems that use PAM for authentication, will set the
PAM  remote  user value to the name of the user that invoked sudo
when the flag is enabled.  This flag is by default.  This setting
is only supported by version 1.9.0 or higher.   On  systems  that
use PAM for authentication, will create a new PAM session for the
command  to  be run in.  Unless is given the or options, PAM ses-
sion modules are run with the flag enabled.  This  prevents  last
login  information from being displayed for every command on some
systems.  Disabling may be needed on older PAM implementations or
on operating systems where opening a PAM session changes the utmp
or wtmp files.  If PAM session support is disabled, resource lim-
its may not be updated for the command being  run.   If  and  are
disabled,  has  not been set and I/O logging has not been config-
ured, will execute the command directly instead of running it  as
a  child process.  This flag is by default.  This setting is only
supported by version 1.8.7 or higher.  On systems  that  use  PAM
for authentication, will attempt to establish credentials for the
target  user by default, if supported by the underlying authenti-
cation system.  One example of a credential is a Kerberos ticket.
If and are disabled, has not been set and  I/O  logging  has  not
been  configured,  will  execute  the command directly instead of
running it as a child process.  This flag is  by  default.   This
setting  is  only  supported by version 1.8.8 or higher.  If set,
PAM authentication will be performed in silent mode.   This  pre-
vents PAM authentication modules from generating output.  In some
cases,  this may suppress important information about why authen-
tication failed.  For example, PAM modules such as will only dis-
play a warning if is disabled.  This flag is  by  default.   This
setting  is  only supported by version 1.9.16 or higher.  If set,
the prompt specified by or the environment variable  will  always
be  used  and will replace the prompt provided by a PAM module or
other authentication method.  This flag is by default.  Normally,
will tell the user when a command could not be found in their en-
vironment variable.  Some sites may wish to disable  this  as  it
could  be  used to gather information on the location of executa-
bles that the normal user does not have access to.  The disadvan-
tage is that if the executable is simply not in the  user's  will
tell  the  user that they are not allowed to run it, which can be
confusing.  This flag is by default.  By default, will initialize
the group vector to the list of groups the  target  user  is  in.
When  is set, the user's existing group vector is left unaltered.
The real and effective group-IDs, however, are still set to match
the target user.  This flag is by default.  By default, reads the
password like most other Unix programs, by turning off echo until
the user hits the return (or enter) key.  Some users become  con-
fused  by this as it appears to them that has hung at this point.
When is set, will provide visual feedback when the user presses a
key.  This does have a security impact as an onlooker may be able
to determine the length of the password being entered.  This flag
is by default.  If set, will only run when the user is logged  in
to a real tty.  When this flag is set, can only be run from a lo-
gin  session  and not via other means such as or cgi-bin scripts.
This flag is by default.  If set, is allowed to  run  too.   Dis-
abling  this prevents users from commands to get a shell by doing
something like Note, however, that turning off will also  prevent
from  running  Disabling provides no real additional security; it
exists purely for historical reasons.  This flag is  by  default.
If  set,  will prompt for the password instead of the password of
the invoking user when running a command or editing a file.  This
flag is by default.  If enabled, allow matching of runas user and
group IDs that are not present in the  password  or  group  data-
bases.   In addition to explicitly matching unknown user or group
IDs in a this option also allows the alias to match unknown  IDs.
This  flag is by default.  This setting is only supported by ver-
sion 1.8.30 or higher.  Older versions of always allowed matching
of unknown user and group IDs.  If enabled, will  only  run  com-
mands  as a user whose shell appears in the file, even if the in-
voking user's would otherwise permit it.  If no file is  present,
a  system-dependent  list of built-in default shells is used.  On
many operating systems, system users such as do not have a  valid
shell  and  this  flag can be used to prevent commands from being
run as those users.  This flag is by default.   This  setting  is
only  supported by version 1.8.30 or higher.  If set, will prompt
for the password of the user defined by the option  (defaults  to
instead  of the password of the invoking user when running a com-
mand or editing a file.  This flag is by default.  If enabled and
is invoked with the option, the environment variable will be  set
to  the  home directory of the target user (which is the user un-
less the option is used).  This flag is largely obsolete and  has
no  effect unless the flag has been disabled or is present in the
list, both of which are strongly discouraged.  This  flag  is  by
default.  Normally, will set the and environment variables to the
name  of the target user (the user specified by unless the option
is given).  However, since some programs (including the RCS revi-
sion control system) use to determine the real  identity  of  the
user,  it  may be desirable to change this behavior.  This can be
done by negating the set_logname option.  The option will have no
effect if the option has not been disabled and the list  contains
or  This  flag is by default.  When enabled, will create an entry
in the utmp (or utmpx) file when a pseudo-terminal is  allocated.
A  pseudo-terminal is allocated by when it is running in a termi-
nal and one or more of the or flags is enabled.  By default,  the
new  entry  will  be a copy of the user's existing utmp entry (if
any), with the tty, time, type, and  pid  fields  updated.   This
flag  is  by  default.  Allow the user to disable the option from
the command line via the option.  Additionally, environment vari-
ables set via the command line are not subject  to  the  restric-
tions imposed by or As such, only trusted users should be allowed
to  set  variables  in this manner.  This flag is by default.  If
set and is invoked with no arguments it acts as if the option had
been given.  That is, it runs a shell as (the shell is determined
by the environment variable if it is set,  falling  back  on  the
shell  listed  in  the invoking user's /etc/passwd entry if not).
This flag is by default.  Normally, when executes a  command  the
real  and  effective  user-IDs  are set to the target user by de-
fault).  This option changes that behavior  such  that  the  real
user-ID  is left as the invoking user's user-ID.  In other words,
this makes act as a set-user-ID wrapper.  This can be  useful  on
systems  that  disable  some  potentially dangerous functionality
when a program is run set-user-ID.  This option is only effective
on systems that support either the or system call.  This flag  is
by  default.   If set, will check all directory components of the
path to be edited for writability by the invoking user.  Symbolic
links will not be  followed  in  writable  directories  and  will
refuse to edit a file located in a writable directory.  These re-
strictions  are  not  enforced when is run by On some systems, if
all directory components of the path to be edited are  not  read-
able  by  the target user, will be unable to edit the file.  This
flag is by default.  This setting was first introduced in version
1.8.15 but initially suffered from a race condition.   The  check
for symbolic links in writable intermediate directories was added
in  version  1.8.16.   By default, will not follow symbolic links
when opening files.  The option can be enabled to allow  to  open
symbolic  links.   It may be overridden on a per-command basis by
the and tags.  This flag is by default.   This  setting  is  only
supported  by version 1.8.15 or higher.  When logging via include
the process ID in the log entry.  This flag is by default.   This
setting  is  only supported by version 1.8.21 or higher.  If set,
will prompt for the password of the user specified by the  option
(defaults to the value of instead of the password of the invoking
user  when  running  a command or editing a file.  This flag pre-
cludes the use of a user-ID not listed in the passwd database  as
an  argument  to  the  option.  This flag is by default.  If set,
users must authenticate on a per-tty basis.  With this  flag  en-
abled, will use a separate record in the time stamp file for each
terminal.   If  disabled,  a  single record is used for all login
sessions.  This option has been superseded  by  the  option.   If
set,  will set the umask as specified in the file without modifi-
cation.  This makes it possible to specify a umask  in  the  file
that  is  more  permissive  than the user's own umask and matches
historical behavior.  If is not set, will set the umask to be the
union of the user's umask and what is specified in This  flag  is
by  default.   If  set,  netgroups  (prefixed with may be used in
place of a user or host.  For LDAP-based sudoers,  netgroup  sup-
port  requires an expensive sub-string match on the server unless
the directive is present in  the  file.   If  netgroups  are  not
needed,  this  option  can  be disabled to reduce the load on the
LDAP server.  This flag is by default.  If set, and is running in
a terminal, the command will be run in a new pseudo-terminal.  If
the process is not attached to a terminal, has no effect.  A  ma-
licious  program  run  under may be capable of injecting commands
into the user's terminal or running a background process that re-
tains access to the user's terminal device even  after  the  main
program has finished executing.  By running the command in a sep-
arate pseudo-terminal, this attack is no longer possible.  A side
effect  of  running  the command in a new pseudo-terminal is that
input will be passed to the command even if  it  is  non-interac-
tive.  This means that, for example, keys pressed while a non-in-
teractive command is running will be consumed by instead of being
passed to the shell after the command exits.  This flag is by de-
fault for 1.9.14 and above.  If set, the user may specify a time-
out  on the command line.  If the timeout expires before the com-
mand has exited, the command will be terminated.  If a timeout is
specified both in the file and on the command line,  the  smaller
of the two timeouts will be used.  See the section for a descrip-
tion  of the timeout syntax.  This flag is by default.  This set-
ting is only supported by version 1.8.20 or higher.  If set, will
store the name of the runas  user  when  updating  the  utmp  (or
utmpx)  file.   By default, stores the name of the invoking user.
This flag is by default.  By default, will refuse to run  if  the
user must enter a password but it is not possible to disable echo
on  the terminal.  If the flag is set, will prompt for a password
even when it would be visible on the screen.  This makes it  pos-
sible  to  run  things like since by default, does not allocate a
tty when running a command.  This flag is by default.  Before  it
executes  a  command,  will close all open file descriptors other
than standard input, standard output, and  standard  error  (file
descriptors  0-2).  The option can be used to specify a different
file descriptor at which to start closing.   The  default  is  3.
The  maximum amount of time a command is allowed to run before it
is terminated.  See the section for a description of the  timeout
syntax.   This  setting  is  only  supported by version 1.8.20 or
higher.  The maximum amount of time to wait when connecting to  a
log server or waiting for a server response.  See the section for
a  description  of  the  timeout syntax.  The default value is 30
seconds.  This setting is only  supported  by  version  1.9.0  or
higher.  The maximum sequence number that will be substituted for
the  escape  in  the  I/O log file (see the description below for
more information).  While the value substituted for  is  in  base
36,  itself  should  be expressed in decimal.  Values larger than
2176782336 (which corresponds to the base 36 sequence number will
be silently  truncated  to  2176782336.   The  default  value  is
2176782336.   Once the local sequence number reaches the value of
it will to zero, after which will truncate and reuse any existing
I/O log path names.  This setting is only  supported  by  version
1.8.7  or  higher.   The  number  of  tries  a user gets to enter
his/her password before logs the failure and exits.  The  default
is  3.  On many systems, has a relatively small log buffer.  IETF
RFC 5424 states that syslog servers must support messages  of  at
least 480 bytes and should support messages up to 2048 bytes.  By
default,  creates  log messages up to 980 bytes which corresponds
to the historic syslog implementation  which  used  a  1024  byte
buffer  to  store  the message, date, hostname, and program name.
To prevent syslog messages from being truncated,  will  split  up
log  messages  that  are  larger  than  bytes.  When a message is
split, additional parts will include the string  after  the  user
name  and before the continued command line arguments.  This set-
ting is only supported by version 1.8.19 or  higher.   Number  of
characters  per line for the file log.  This value is used to de-
cide when to wrap lines for nicer log files.  This has no  effect
on  the  syslog  log  file, only the file log.  The default is 80
(use 0 or negate the option to disable  word  wrap).   Number  of
minutes  before  the password prompt times out, or 0 for no time-
out.  The timeout may include a fractional  component  if  minute
granularity  is insufficient, for example 2.5.  The default is 5.
Number of minutes that can elapse before will ask for a  password
again.   The timeout may include a fractional component if minute
granularity is insufficient, for example 2.5.  The default is  5.
Set this to 0 to always prompt for a password.  If set to a value
less  than 0 the user's time stamp will not expire until the sys-
tem is rebooted.  This can be used to allow users  to  create  or
delete  their  own  time  stamps via and respectively.  File mode
creation mask to use when running the command.  Negate  this  op-
tion  or  set it to 0777 to prevent from changing the umask.  Un-
less the flag is set, the actual umask will be the union  of  the
user's  umask  and  the  value  of the setting, which defaults to
0022.  This guarantees that never lowers the umask when running a
command.  If is explicitly set in it will override any umask set-
ting in PAM or login.conf.  If is not set in the umask  specified
by  PAM or login.conf will take precedence.  The umask setting in
PAM is not used for which does not create a new PAM session.   It
set,  will  display  this message when a user is denied access to
run the specified command, but is listed  in  the  file  for  the
host.   This can be used to provide additional, site-specific in-
formation to the user when a command is denied  by  the  security
policy.   It  does not override the standard warning the user re-
ceives when a command is denied.  Message that is displayed after
a user fails to authenticate.  The message may include the escape
which will expand to the number of failed password attempts.   If
set,  it overrides the default message, Message that is displayed
if a user enters an incorrect password.  The  default  is  unless
insults are enabled.  A colon separated list of editor path names
used  by and For this list is used to find an editor when none of
the or environment variables are set to an editor that exists and
is executable.  For it is used as a white list  of  allowed  edi-
tors;  will choose the editor that matches the user's or environ-
ment variable if possible, or the first editor in the  list  that
exists and is executable if not.  Unless invoked as does not pre-
serve the or environment variables unless they are present in the
list  or  the  option is disabled.  The default is The underlying
mechanism used by the and options.  It has the following possible
values: Preload a dynamic shared object (shared library) that in-
tercepts the and library functions.  A value of  is  incompatible
with  SELinux  RBAC  support.   Use to intercept the system call.
This is only supported on Linux systems where  filtering  is  en-
abled.   If  the  file  is missing or does not contain a element,
setting to will have no effect and will be used instead.  The de-
fault is to use if it is supported by the system  and  if  it  is
not.   The  top-level directory to use when constructing the path
name for the input/output log directory.  Only used if the or op-
tions are enabled or when the or tags are present for a  command.
The  session sequence number, if any, is stored in the directory.
The default is The following percent escape  sequences  are  sup-
ported:  expanded  to a monotonically increasing base-36 sequence
number, such as 0100A5, where every two digits are used to form a
new directory, e.g., expanded to the invoking user's  login  name
expanded  to  the  name  of the invoking user's real group-ID ex-
panded to the login name of the user the command will be  run  as
(e.g., expanded to the group name of the user the command will be
run  as (e.g., expanded to the local host name without the domain
name expanded to the base name of the command being run In  addi-
tion,  any  escape  sequences  supported by the system's function
will be expanded.  To include a  literal  character,  the  string
should  be  used.   Any path name separator characters present in
the user, group or host name will be replaced  with  an  underbar
during  expansion.   The path name, relative to in which to store
input/output logs when the or options are enabled or when the  or
tags  are  present  for  a command.  may contain directory compo-
nents.  The default is See the option above for a  list  of  sup-
ported  percent  escape sequences.  In addition to the escape se-
quences, path names that end in six or more  will  have  the  re-
placed  with  a unique combination of digits and letters, similar
to the function.  If the path created by  concatenating  and  al-
ready  exists,  the  existing  I/O log file will be truncated and
overwritten unless ends in six or more If set, will flush I/O log
data to disk after each write  instead  of  buffering  it.   This
makes it possible to view the logs in real-time as the program is
executing  but  may significantly reduce the effectiveness of I/O
log compression.  This flag is by default.  This setting is  only
supported by version 1.8.20 or higher.  The group name to look up
when  setting  the group-ID on new I/O log files and directories.
If is not set, the primary group-ID of the user specified  by  is
used.   If neither nor are set, I/O log files and directories are
created with group-ID 0.  This setting is only supported by  ver-
sion  1.8.19  or  higher.  The file mode to use when creating I/O
log files.  Mode bits for read and write permissions  for  owner,
group,  or  other  are  honored, everything else is ignored.  The
file permissions will always include the  owner  read  and  write
bits,  even  if they are not present in the specified mode.  When
creating I/O log directories, search (execute) bits are added  to
match the read and write bits specified by Defaults to 0600 (read
and  write by user only).  This setting is only supported by ver-
sion 1.8.19 or higher.  The user name to look up when setting the
user and group-IDs on new I/O log files and directories.   If  is
set,  it will be used instead of the user's primary group-ID.  By
default, I/O log files and directories are created with user  and
group-ID  0.   This  setting  can be useful when the I/O logs are
stored on a Network File System (NFS) share.  Having a  dedicated
user  own  the I/O log files means that does not write to the log
files as user-ID 0, which is usually not permitted by NFS.   This
setting  is  only supported by version 1.8.19 or higher.  The di-
rectory in which stores per-user lecture status  files.   Once  a
user  has  received the lecture, a zero-length file is created in
this directory so that will not lecture the user again.  This di-
rectory should be cleared when the system reboots.   The  default
is  The  path to a certificate authority bundle file, in PEM for-
mat, to use instead of the system's default certificate authority
database when authenticating the log server.  The default  is  to
use  the  system's  default certificate authority database.  This
setting has no effect unless is set and the remote log server  is
secured  with  TLS.   This  setting  is only supported by version
1.9.0 or higher.  The path to the client's certificate  file,  in
PEM  format.  This setting is required when the remote log server
is secured with TLS and client certificate validation is enabled.
For client certificate validation is controlled  by  the  option,
which defaults to This setting is only supported by version 1.9.0
or  higher.   The  path  to the client's private key file, in PEM
format.  This setting is required when the remote log  server  is
secured  with  TLS  and client certificate validation is enabled.
For client certificate validation  is  controlled  by  the  flag,
which defaults to This setting is only supported by version 1.9.0
or  higher.   Subject  of  the mail sent to the user.  The escape
will expand to the host name of the machine.  Default  is  As  of
version  1.8.1  this  option is no longer supported.  The path to
the noexec file should now be set in the file.  On  systems  that
use  PAM  for  authentication, this is the service name used when
the option is specified.  The default value is either or  depend-
ing  on whether or not the option is also specified.  See the de-
scription of for more information.  This  setting  is  only  sup-
ported  by  version 1.9.9 or higher.  On systems that use PAM for
authentication, this is the service name used when the option  is
specified.   The default value is See the description of for more
information.  This setting is only supported by version 1.8.8  or
higher.   On systems that use PAM for authentication, the service
name specifies the PAM policy to apply.  This usually corresponds
to an entry in the file or a file in the directory.  The  default
value  is  This  setting  is  only  supported by version 1.8.8 or
higher.  The default prompt to use when asking  for  a  password;
can  be  overridden  via  the option or the environment variable.
The following percent escape sequences are supported: expanded to
the local host name including the domain name (only  if  the  ma-
chine's  host  name  is fully qualified or the option is set) ex-
panded to the local host name without the domain name expanded to
the user whose password is being  asked  for  (respects  the  and
flags  in expanded to the login name of the user the command will
be run as (defaults to expanded to the invoking user's login name
two consecutive characters are collapsed into a single  character
On  systems that use PAM for authentication, will only be used if
the prompt provided by the PAM module matches the string or  This
ensures  that  the  setting does not interfere with challenge-re-
sponse style authentication.  The flag can be used to change this
behavior.  The default value is The default user to run  commands
as  if the option is not specified on the command line.  This de-
faults to Locale to use when parsing the  sudoers  file,  logging
commands,  and sending email.  Changing the locale may affect how
sudoers is interpreted.  Defaults to  uses  per-user  time  stamp
files  for credential caching.  The option can be used to specify
the type of time stamp record used.  It has the following  possi-
ble  values:  A  single  time  stamp  record is used for all of a
user's login sessions,  regardless  of  the  terminal  or  parent
process  ID.   An additional record is used to serialize password
prompts when is used multiple times in a pipeline, but this  does
not  affect  authentication.   A single time stamp record is used
for all processes with the same parent process  ID  (usually  the
shell).  Commands run from the same shell (or other common parent
process)  will not require a password for minutes (5 by default).
Commands run via with a different parent process ID, for  example
from  a shell script, will be authenticated separately.  One time
stamp record is used for each terminal, which means that a user's
login sessions are authenticated separately.  If no  terminal  is
present,  the  behavior is the same as Commands run from the same
terminal will not require a password for minutes (5 by  default).
The  time  stamp  is  stored in the kernel as an attribute of the
terminal device.  If no terminal is present, the behavior is  the
same as Negative values are not supported and positive values are
limited  to a maximum of 60 minutes.  This is currently only sup-
ported on The default value is This setting is only supported  by
version 1.8.21 or higher.  The directory in which stores its time
stamp  files.   This  directory should be cleared when the system
reboots.  The default is The owner of the lecture  status  direc-
tory, time stamp directory and all files stored therein.  The de-
fault  is The option specifies the path to a file that is created
the first time a user that is a member of the or groups runs Only
available if is configured with the option.  The default value is
The option specifies the fully qualified path to a file  contain-
ing  variables  to be set in the environment of the program being
run.  Entries in this file should either be of the  form  or  The
value  may  optionally  be  enclosed  in single or double quotes.
Variables in this file are only added if the  variable  does  not
already  exist in the environment.  This file is considered to be
part of the security policy, its  contents  are  not  subject  to
other  environment  restrictions  such as and Users in this group
are exempt from password and PATH requirements.  The  group  name
specified  should  not  include a prefix.  This is not set by de-
fault.  Determines whether will execute a command by its path  or
by  an  open file descriptor.  It has the following possible val-
ues: Always execute by file descriptor.  Never  execute  by  file
descriptor.   Only  execute by file descriptor if the command has
an associated digest in the file.   The  default  value  is  This
avoids a time of check versus time of use race condition when the
command  is located in a directory writable by the invoking user.
will change the first element of the argument vector for  scripts
($0  in  the  shell) due to the way the kernel runs script inter-
preters.  Instead of being a normal path, it will refer to a file
descriptor.  For example, on Solaris and on Linux.  A  workaround
is  to use the environment variable instead.  The setting is only
used when the command is matched by path name.  It has no  effect
if the command is matched by the built-in alias.  This setting is
only  supported  by  version  1.8.20 or higher.  If the operating
system does not support the system call, this setting has no  ef-
fect.   A  string  containing  a group plugin with optional argu-
ments.  The string should consist  of  the  plugin  path,  either
fully-qualified  or  relative  to  the directory, followed by any
configuration arguments the plugin requires.  These arguments (if
any) will be passed to the plugin's initialization function.   If
arguments  are  present,  the  string  must be enclosed in double
quotes On 64-bit systems, if the plugin is present but cannot  be
loaded,  will  look  for a 64-bit version and, if it exists, load
that as a fallback.  The exact rules for this vary by system.  On
Solaris, if the plugin is stored in a directory  ending  in  will
create  a  fallback  path by appending to the directory name; be-
comes On Linux, a directory ending in will be transformed  to  as
the  fallback  path;  becomes  On all other systems, the fallback
path is generated by adding a before the file extension;  becomes
On  AIX  systems, the plugin may be either a shared object ending
in or an archive file containing a shared object ending  in  with
the  name  of  the  shared object in parentheses at the end.  For
more information see This option controls when  a  short  lecture
will  be printed along with the password prompt.  It has the fol-
lowing possible values: Always lecture the user.   Never  lecture
the  user.   Only  lecture the user the first time they run If no
value is specified, a value of is implied.  Negating  the  option
results in a value of being used.  The default value is Path to a
file  containing  an alternate lecture that will be used in place
of the standard lecture if the named file  exists.   By  default,
uses  a  built-in  lecture.  This option controls when a password
will be required when a user runs with the option.   It  has  the
following  possible  values:  All the user's file entries for the
current host must have the flag set to avoid entering a password.
The user must always enter a password  to  use  the  option.   At
least  one  of  the user's file entries for the current host must
have the flag set to avoid entering a password.   The  user  need
never  enter a password to use the option.  If no value is speci-
fied, a value of is implied.  Negating the option  results  in  a
value  of being used.  The default value is The event log format.
Supported log formats are: Currently, this is an alias for  In  a
future  version of will be equivalent to JSON log entries contain
the full user details as well as the execution environment if the
command was allowed.  Log events in (minified) JSON format.  Each
event is written as a separate JSON object on single line without
extraneous white space.  Due to limitations of the protocol, JSON
events sent via may be truncated.  Log  events  in  JSON  format.
When  logging  to  a file, the entire file is treated as a single
JSON object consisting of multiple events,  each  event  spanning
multiple  lines.  When logging via there is no difference between
the and formats.  Log events in  traditional  sudo-style  format,
see  for  details.  This setting affects logs sent via as well as
the file specified by the setting, if any.  The default value  is
Path  to  the log file (not the syslog log file).  Setting a path
turns on logging to a file; negating this option  turns  it  off.
By  default, logs via syslog.  Flags to use when invoking mailer.
Defaults to Path to  mail  program  used  to  send  warning  mail
(negate  to  prevent from sending mail).  Defaults to the path to
sendmail found at configure time.  Address to use for the address
when sending warning and error mail.  The address should  be  en-
closed in double quotes to protect against interpreting the sign.
Defaults  to the name of the user running Address to send warning
and error mail to (negate to prevent from sending mail).  The ad-
dress should be enclosed in double quotes to protect against  in-
terpreting  the  sign.   Defaults  to  root.  The maximum size to
which the process's address space may grow (in  bytes),  if  sup-
ported  by  the operating system.  See for more information.  The
largest size core dump file that may be created (in bytes).   See
for more information.  Defaults to 0 (no core dump created).  The
maximum amount of CPU time that the process may use (in seconds).
See  for  more information.  The maximum size of the data segment
for the process (in  bytes).   See  for  more  information.   The
largest  size  file  that the process may create (in bytes).  See
for more information.  The  maximum  number  of  locks  that  the
process may establish, if supported by the operating system.  See
for more information.  The maximum size that the process may lock
in  memory (in bytes), if supported by the operating system.  See
for more information.  The  maximum  number  of  files  that  the
process  may  have  open.  See for more information.  The maximum
number of processes that the user may  run  simultaneously.   See
for  more  information.   The maximum size to which the process's
resident set size may grow (in bytes).  See for more information.
The maximum size to  which  the  process's  stack  may  grow  (in
bytes).   See  for  more  information.   The option specifies the
fully qualified path to a file containing variables to be set  in
the  environment  of the program being run.  Entries in this file
should be assignments in the form or separated by newline charac-
ters.  The value may optionally be enclosed in single  or  double
quotes.   Shell-style  variable  substitution  is  not supported.
Empty lines and comments starting with a pound sign are  ignored.
Variables  in  this  file are only added if the variable does not
already exist in the environment.  Unlike the file's contents are
not trusted and are processed in a manner similar to that of  the
invoking  user's  environment.   If  is enabled, variables in the
file will only be added if they are  matched  by  either  the  or
list.  If is disabled, variables in the file are added as long as
they  are  not matched by the list.  In either case, the contents
of are processed before the contents of If  set,  will  use  this
value for the root directory when running a command.  The special
value  will  allow the user to specify the root directory via op-
tion.  See the section for more details.  It is only possible  to
use  as a command-specific Defaults setting if the command exists
with the same path both inside and outside the chroot jail.  This
restriction does not apply to global,  host,  or  user-based  De-
faults settings or to a that includes a This setting is only sup-
ported  by version 1.9.3 or higher.  Support for setting the root
directory is deprecated and will be removed in a  future  version
of  If  set,  will  use this value for the working directory when
running a command.  The special value  will  allow  the  user  to
specify  the  working  directory via option.  See the section for
more details.  This setting is only supported by version 1.9.3 or
higher.  If set, will use this value in place of the user's envi-
ronment variable.  There are two basic use cases for To  make  it
possible for to find system administrator commands located in di-
rectories  that  may  not be in the default user path, such as To
help protect scripts and programs  that  execute  other  commands
without  first  setting  to a safe value.  Otherwise, a user with
limited privileges may be able to run arbitrary commands  by  ma-
nipulating  the  if the command being run executes other commands
without using a fully-qualified path name.  Users  in  the  group
specified  by  the option are not affected by This option is dis-
abled by default.  Syslog facility if syslog is  being  used  for
logging  (negate  to  disable syslog logging).  Defaults to auth.
The following syslog facilities are supported: (if your  OS  sup-
ports  it),  and  Syslog priority to use when the user is not al-
lowed to run a command or when  authentication  is  unsuccessful.
Defaults  to  alert.   The  following  syslog priorities are sup-
ported: and Negating the option or setting it to a value of  will
disable logging of unsuccessful commands.  Syslog priority to use
when  the  user is allowed to run a command and authentication is
successful.  Defaults to notice.  See for the list  of  supported
syslog  priorities.  Negating the option or setting it to a value
of will disable logging of successful commands.  This option con-
trols when a password will be required when a user runs with  the
option.   It  has  the  following possible values: All the user's
file entries for the current host must have the flag set to avoid
entering a password.  The user must always enter  a  password  to
use  the option.  At least one of the user's file entries for the
current host must have the flag set to avoid entering a password.
The user need never enter a password to use the  option.   If  no
value  is  specified, a value of is implied.  Negating the option
results in a value of being used.  The default value is  Environ-
ment  variables  to be removed from the user's environment unless
they are considered For all variables except means that the vari-
able's value does not contain any or  characters.   This  can  be
used  to  guard  against  printf-style  format vulnerabilities in
poorly-written programs.  The variable is  considered  unsafe  if
any  of  the following are true: It consists of a fully-qualified
path name, optionally prefixed with a colon that does  not  match
the  location  of the directory.  It contains a path element.  It
contains white space or non-printable characters.  It  is  longer
than the value of The argument may be a double-quoted, space-sep-
arated  list  or  a single value without double-quotes.  The list
can be replaced, added to, deleted from, or disabled by using the
and operators respectively.  Regardless of whether the option  is
enabled  or disabled, variables specified by will be preserved in
the environment if  they  pass  the  aforementioned  check.   The
global  list  of environment variables to check is displayed when
is run by with the option.  Environment variables to  be  removed
from  the  user's  environment  when the option is not in effect.
The argument may be a double-quoted, space-separated  list  or  a
single  value  without  double-quotes.  The list can be replaced,
added to, deleted from, or disabled by using  the  and  operators
respectively.  The global list of environment variables to remove
is displayed when is run by with the option.  Many operating sys-
tems  will  remove potentially dangerous variables from the envi-
ronment of any set-user-ID process (such as Environment variables
to be preserved in the user's environment when the option  is  in
effect.   This  allows  fine-grained control over the environment
processes will receive.  The argument  may  be  a  double-quoted,
space-separated  list  or  a  single value without double-quotes.
The list can be replaced, added to, deleted from, or disabled  by
using  the  and operators respectively.  The global list of vari-
ables to keep is displayed when is run by with the option.   Pre-
serving  the environment variable has security implications since
many programs use it when searching  for  configuration  or  data
files.   Adding to may enable a user to run unrestricted commands
via and is strongly discouraged.  Users  wishing  to  edit  files
with  should run (or to get their accustomed editor configuration
instead of invoking the editor directly.  A list of one  or  more
servers to use for remote event and I/O log storage, separated by
white space.  Log servers must be running or another service that
implements  the  protocol described by Server addresses should be
of the form The host portion may be a host name, an IPv4 address,
or an IPv6 address in square brackets.  If the optional  flag  is
present,  the connection will be secured with Transport Layer Se-
curity (TLS) version 1.2 or 1.3.  Versions of TLS  prior  to  1.2
are  not  supported.   If a port is specified, it may either be a
port number or a well-known service name as defined by the system
service name database.  If no port is specified, port 30343  will
be used for plaintext connections and port 30344 will be used for
TLS connections.  When is set, event log data will be logged both
locally  (see  the and settings) as well as remotely, but I/O log
data will only be logged remotely.  If multiple hosts are  speci-
fied, they will be attempted in reverse order.  If no log servers
are  available, the user will not be able to run a command unless
either the flag (I/O logging enabled) or the  flag  (I/O  logging
disabled)  is set.  Likewise, if the connection to the log server
is interrupted while is running, the command will  be  terminated
unless  the  flag  (I/O logging enabled) or the flag (I/O logging
disabled) is set.  This setting  is  only  supported  by  version
1.9.0  or  higher.   A list of POSIX extended regular expressions
used to match password prompts in the terminal output.  As an ex-
tension, if the regular expression begins with it will be matched
in a case-insensitive manner.  Each regular expression is limited
to 1024 characters.  This option is only used when has been  dis-
abled.   The  default  value is This setting is only supported by
version 1.9.10 or higher.  The plugin supports its own plugin in-
terface to allow non-Unix group lookups which can query  a  group
source  other than the standard Unix group database.  This can be
used to implement  support  for  the  syntax  described  earlier.
Group  provider plugins are specified via the setting.  The argu-
ment to should consist of the plugin path, either fully-qualified
or relative to the directory, followed by any  configuration  op-
tions  the plugin requires.  These options (if specified) will be
passed to the plugin's initialization function.  If  options  are
present, the string must be enclosed in double quotes The follow-
ing  group  provider plugins are installed by default: The plugin
supports an alternate group file that uses the same syntax as the
file.  The path to the group file should be specified as  an  op-
tion to the plugin.  For example, if the group file to be used is
Defaults  group_plugin="group_file.so /etc/sudo-group" The plugin
supports group lookups via the standard C library  functions  and
This  plugin  can  be used in instances where the user belongs to
groups not present in the user's supplemental group vector.  This
plugin takes no  options:  Defaults  group_plugin=system_group.so
The  group  provider plugin API is described in detail in can log
events in either JSON or format, this section describes  the  log
format.   Depending on configuration, can log events via to a lo-
cal log file, or both.  The log format  is  almost  identical  in
both  cases.   Any control characters present in the log data are
formatted in octal with a leading character.  For example, a hor-
izontal tab is stored as  and  an  embedded  carriage  return  is
stored  as  In addition, space characters in the command path are
stored as Command line arguments that contain spaces are enclosed
in single quotes This makes it possible to  distinguish  multiple
command  line  arguments  from  a  single  argument that contains
spaces.  Literal single quotes and backslash characters  in  com-
mand  line arguments are escaped with a backslash.  Commands that
sudo runs are logged using the following format (split into  mul-
tiple  lines for readability): date hostname progname: username :
TTY=ttyname ; CHROOT=chroot ; \
    PWD=cwd ; USER=runasuser ; GROUP=runasgroup ; TSID=logid ; \
    ENV=env_vars COMMAND=command Where the fields are as follows:
The date the command was run.  Typically, this is in  the  format
If logging via the actual date format is controlled by the syslog
daemon.  If logging to a file and the option is enabled, the date
will  also  include  the  year.  The name of the host was run on.
This field is only present when logging via The name of the  pro-
gram,  usually or This field is only present when logging via The
login name of the user who ran The short  name  of  the  terminal
(e.g.,  or  was run on, or if there was no terminal present.  The
root directory that the command was run in, if one was specified.
The current working directory that was run in.  The user the com-
mand was run as.  The group the command was run  as  if  one  was
specified on the command line.  An I/O log identifier that can be
used  to  replay the command's output.  This is only present when
the or option is enabled.  A list of environment variables speci-
fied on the command line, if specified.  The actual command  that
was executed, including any command line arguments.  Messages are
logged  using  the  locale specified by which defaults to the lo-
cale.  If the user is not allowed to run the command, the  reason
for  the  denial will follow the user name.  Possible reasons in-
clude: The user is not listed in the file.  The user is listed in
the file but is not allowed to run commands  on  the  host.   The
user  is listed in the file for the host but they are not allowed
to run the specified command.  The user  failed  to  enter  their
password  after  3  tries.   The actual number of tries will vary
based on the number of failed attempts and the value of  the  op-
tion.  The option was specified but a password was required.  The
user  specified  environment  variables  on the command line that
were not allowed by If an error occurs, will log a  message  and,
in  most  cases,  send  a message to the administrator via email.
Possible errors include: encountered an error  when  parsing  the
specified  file.  In some cases, the actual error may be one line
above or below the line number listed, depending on the  type  of
error.   The file contains one or more unknown Defaults settings.
This does not prevent  from  running,  but  the  file  should  be
checked using The time stamp directory owner, as specified by the
setting,  could  not be found in the password database.  The file
could not be opened for reading.  This can happen when  the  file
is  located on a remote file system that maps user-ID 0 to a dif-
ferent value.  Normally, tries to open the file using group  per-
missions  to  avoid  this  problem.  Consider either changing the
ownership of or adding an argument like  (where  is  the  user-ID
that owns the file) to the end of the line in the file.  The file
is  missing.   The  file exists but is not a regular file or sym-
bolic link.  The file has the wrong owner.  If you wish to change
the file owner, add (where is the user-ID that owns the file)  to
the  line  in  the  file.   The permissions on the file allow all
users to write to it.  The file must not be  world-writable,  the
default  file mode is 0440 (readable by owner and group, writable
by none).  The default mode may be changed via the option to  the
line  in  the  file.  The file has the wrong group ownership.  If
you wish to change the file group ownership, add  (where  is  the
group-ID that owns the file) to the line in the file.  was unable
to  read  or  create the user's time stamp file.  This can happen
when is set to a user other than and the mode on is  not  search-
able  by  group or other.  The default mode for is 0711.  was un-
able to write to the user's time stamp file.  The time stamp  di-
rectory  is  owned  by  a user other than This can occur when the
value of has been changed.  will ignore the time stamp  directory
until the owner is corrected.  The time stamp directory is group-
writable;  it should be writable only by The default mode for the
time stamp directory is 0700.  will ignore the time stamp  direc-
tory  until the mode is corrected.  By default, logs messages via
The and fields are added by the system's  function,  not  itself.
As such, they may vary in format on different systems.  The maxi-
mum  size  of  syslog messages varies from system to system.  The
setting can be used to change the  maximum  syslog  message  size
from  the  default value of 980 bytes.  For more information, see
the description of If the option is set,  will  log  to  a  local
file,  such  as  When logging to a file, uses a format similar to
with a few important differences: The field is not present.   The
is  only  logged if the option is enabled.  The date does not in-
clude the year unless the option  is  enabled.   Lines  that  are
longer  than characters (80 by default) are word-wrapped and con-
tinued on the next line with a four character indent.  This makes
entries easier to read for a human being, but makes it more  dif-
ficult  to  use  on the log files.  If the option is set to 0 (or
negated with a word wrap will be disabled.  When I/O  logging  is
enabled, will runs the command in a pseudo-terminal, logging user
input and/or output, depending on which flags are enabled.  There
are  five  distinct  types of I/O that can be logged, each with a
corresponding flag.  In addition to flags  described  the  above,
the  flag  and  command tag set both and The flag and command tag
set and To capture terminal input and output, run the command  in
a pseudo-terminal, logging the input and output before passing it
on  to  the user.  To capture the standard input, standard output
or standard error, uses a pipe to interpose  itself  between  the
input  or output stream, logging the I/O before passing it to the
other end of the pipe.  I/O can be logged either to the local ma-
chine or to a remote log server.  For local logs, I/O  is  logged
to  the  directory  specified  by  the  option by default using a
unique session ID that is included in the log line, prefixed with
The option may be used to control the format of the  session  ID.
For  remote  logs, the setting is used to specify one or more log
servers running or another server that  implements  the  protocol
described  by  When  logging standard input, anything sent to the
standard input will be consumed, regardless of whether or not the
command run via is actively reading the standard input.  This may
have unexpected results when using in a shell script that expects
to process the standard input.  For example, given the  following
shell  script:  #!/bin/sh sudo echo testing echo done It will be-
have as expected when the script is passed to the shell as  a  an
argument:  $  sh  test.sh  testing done However, if the script is
passed to the shell on the standard input, the command will  con-
sume  the  rest  of the script.  This means that the statement is
never executed.  $ sh -s < test.sh testing There are several ways
to work around this problem: Redirect  the  standard  input  from
when  running  a command via that does not need to read the stan-
dard input.  sudo echo testing < /dev/null Pass the script to the
shell by path name instead of via the standard input.  sh test.sh
Disable logging the standard input for commands that do not  need
to  read  the  standard input.  Defaults!/bin/echo !log_stdin De-
pending on the command, it may not be desirable to log the  stan-
dard  input or standard output.  For example, I/O logging of com-
mands that send or receive large amount of data via the  standard
output  or  standard input such as and could fill up the log file
system with superfluous data.  It is possible to disable  logging
of  the  standard  input and standard output for such commands as
follows:  Cmnd_Alias  COPY_CMDS  =  /usr/bin/tar,  /usr/bin/cpio,
/usr/bin/rsync

#  Log  input  and  output but omit stdin and stdout when copying
files.    Defaults   log_input,   log_output   Defaults!COPY_CMDS
!log_stdin,  !log_stdout However, be aware that using the flag or
the command tag will also enable Likewise, the flag or  the  com-
mand  tag will enable and Careful ordering of rules may be neces-
sary to achieve the results that you expect.  For both local  and
remote  I/O logs, each log is stored in a separate directory that
contains the following files: A text file containing  information
about  the  command.   The  first  line consists of the following
colon-delimited fields: the time the command was run, the name of
the user who ran the name of the target user,  the  name  of  the
target  group (optional), the terminal that was run from, and the
number of lines and columns of  the  terminal.   The  second  and
third  lines  contain  the  working directory the command was run
from and the path name of the command itself (with  arguments  if
present).  A JSON-formatted file containing information about the
command.  This is similar to the file but contains additional in-
formation  and is easily extensible.  The file will be used by in
preference to the file if it exists.  The file  may  contain  the
following elements: A JSON object containing time the command was
run.  It consists of two values, and The number of columns of the
terminal  the command ran on, or zero if no terminal was present.
The fully-qualified path of the command that was run.  The number
of lines of the terminal the command ran on, or zero if no termi-
nal was present.  A JSON array representing the  command's  argu-
ment  vector  as  passed to the system call.  A JSON array repre-
senting the command's environment as passed to the  system  call.
The  group  ID  the command ran as.  This element is only present
when the user specifies a group on the command line.  The name of
the group the command ran as.  This element is only present  when
the  user specifies a group on the command line.  The user ID the
command ran as.  The name of the user the command  ran  as.   The
current  working  directory at the time was run.  The name of the
host the command was run on.  The name of the user  who  ran  the
command  via The path name of the terminal the user invoked from.
If the command was run in a pseudo-terminal,  will  be  different
from  the  terminal the command actually ran in.  Timing informa-
tion used to replay the session.  Each line consists of  the  I/O
log  entry type and amount of time since the last entry, followed
by type-specific data.  The I/O log entry types and their  corre-
sponding  type-specific data are: standard input, number of bytes
in the entry standard output, number of bytes in the entry  stan-
dard  error,  number of bytes in the entry terminal input, number
of bytes in the entry terminal output, number of bytes in the en-
try window change, new number lines and columns bug compatibility
for 1.8.7 terminal output command suspend or resume,  signal  re-
ceived  Raw input from the user's terminal, exactly as it was re-
ceived.  This file is only present if the or flags  are  set  and
was  run  from a terminal.  No post-processing is performed.  For
manual viewing, you may wish to convert carriage  return  charac-
ters  in  the log to line feeds.  For example: The standard input
when no terminal is present, or input redirected from a  pipe  or
file.   This file is only present if the or flags are set and the
standard input is not connected to a terminal.  Output  from  the
pseudo-terminal  (what the command writes to the screen).  Termi-
nal-specific post-processing is  performed  before  the  data  is
logged.   This  means  that,  for example, line feeds are usually
converted to line feed/carriage return pairs and tabs may be  ex-
panded  to spaces.  This file is only present if the or flags are
set and was run from a terminal.  The  standard  output  when  no
terminal  is  present,  or  output  redirected to a pipe or file.
This file is only present if the or flags are set and  the  stan-
dard  output  is not connected to a terminal.  The standard error
when no terminal is present, or output redirected to  a  pipe  or
file.   This file is only present if the or flags are set and the
standard error is not connected to a terminal.  All  files  other
than  are compressed in gzip format unless the flag has been dis-
abled.  Due to buffering, it is not normally possible to  display
the  I/O  logs in real-time as the program is executing.  The I/O
log data will not be complete until the program run by has exited
or has been terminated by a signal.  The flag can be used to dis-
able buffering, in which case I/O log data is written to disk  as
soon  as  it is available.  The output portion of an I/O log file
can be viewed with the utility, which can also be used to list or
search the available logs.  User input may contain sensitive  in-
formation  such  as passwords (even if they are not echoed to the
screen), which will be stored in the log  file  unencrypted.   In
most  cases, logging the command output via or is all that is re-
quired.  When logging input, consider disabling the flag.   Since
each  session's I/O logs are stored in a separate directory, tra-
ditional log rotation utilities cannot be used to limit the  num-
ber  of I/O logs.  The simplest way to limit the number of I/O is
by setting the option to the maximum number of logs you  wish  to
store.  Once the I/O log sequence number reaches it will be reset
to  zero and will truncate and reuse any existing I/O logs.  Sudo
front-end configuration List of who can  run  what  Local  groups
file  List  of  network groups I/O log files Directory containing
time stamps for the security policy Directory containing  lecture
status files for the security policy Initial environment for mode
on  AIX and Linux systems Below are example file entries.  Admit-
tedly, some of these are a bit contrived.  First, we allow a  few
environment  variables to pass and then define our # Run X appli-
cations through sudo; HOME is used  to  find  the  #  .Xauthority
file.   Other  programs  use HOME to locate configuration # files
and this may lead to privilege escalation!  Defaults env_keep  +=
"DISPLAY HOME"

#  User alias specification User_Alias      FULLTIMERS = millert,
mikef, dowdy User_Alias      PARTTIMERS = bostley,  jwfox,  crawl
User_Alias      WEBADMIN = will, wendy, wim

#  Runas  alias specification Runas_Alias     OP = root, operator
Runas_Alias     DB = oracle,  sybase  Runas_Alias     ADMINGRP  =
adm, oper

#  Host  alias  specification  Host_Alias      SPARC  =  bigtime,
eclipse, moet, anchor :\                 SGI  =  grolsch,  dande-
lion,  black  :\                 ALPHA = widget, thalamus, foobar
:\                 HPPA = boa, nag, python Host_Alias      CUNETS
= 128.138.0.0/255.255.0.0 Host_Alias      CSNETS = 128.138.243.0,
128.138.204.0/24, 128.138.242.0  Host_Alias      SERVERS  =  pri-
mary,  mail, www, ns Host_Alias      CDROM = orion, perseus, her-
cules

# Cmnd alias specification Cmnd_Alias      DUMPS  =  /usr/bin/mt,
/usr/sbin/dump,                                 /usr/sbin/rdump,\
                        /usr/sbin/restore,   /usr/sbin/rrestore,\
                        sha224:0GomF8mNN3wlDt1HD9XldjJ3SNgpFd-
bjO1+NsQ==         \                                 /home/opera-
tor/bin/start_backups   Cmnd_Alias      KILL   =    /usr/bin/kill
Cmnd_Alias      PRINTING     =    /usr/sbin/lpc,    /usr/bin/lprm
Cmnd_Alias      SHUTDOWN           =           /usr/sbin/shutdown
Cmnd_Alias      HALT  =  /usr/sbin/halt  Cmnd_Alias      REBOOT =
/usr/sbin/reboot    Cmnd_Alias      SHELLS     =     /usr/bin/sh,
/usr/bin/csh,  /usr/bin/ksh,\                            /usr/lo-
cal/bin/tcsh,  /usr/bin/rsh,\                            /usr/lo-
cal/bin/zsh        Cmnd_Alias      SU        =        /usr/bin/su
Cmnd_Alias      PAGERS     =     /usr/bin/more,      /usr/bin/pg,
/usr/bin/less  Here  we  override some of the compiled in default
values.  We want to log via using the facility in all  cases  and
for  commands  to be run with the target user's home directory as
the working directory.  We don't want to subject  the  full  time
staff  to  the  lecture.  User need not provide a password and we
don't want to reset the or  environment  variables  when  running
commands as Additionally, on the machines in the we keep an addi-
tional  local  log file and make sure we log the year in each log
line since the log entries will be kept around for several years.
Lastly, we disable shell escapes for the commands in  the  PAGERS
and This will not effectively constrain users with privileges.  #
Override     built-in    defaults    Defaults                sys-
log=auth,runcwd=~    Defaults>root           !set_logname     De-
faults:FULLTIMERS     !lecture Defaults:millert        !authenti-
cate  Defaults@SERVERS        log_year, logfile=/var/log/sudo.log
Defaults!PAGERS         noexec The is the part that actually  de-
termines  who  may  run  what.   root            ALL  = (ALL) ALL
%wheel          ALL = (ALL) ALL We let and any user in group  run
any  command  on  any  host  as  any user.  FULLTIMERS      ALL =
NOPASSWD: ALL Full time sysadmins and may run any command on  any
host  without  authenticating  themselves.  PARTTIMERS      ALL =
ALL Part time sysadmins and may run any command on any  host  but
they  must  authenticate  themselves first (since the entry lacks
the tag).  jack            CSNETS = ALL The user may run any com-
mand on the machines in the alias  (the  networks  128.138.243.0,
128.138.204.0,  and  128.138.242.0).   Of  those  networks,  only
128.138.204.0 has an explicit netmask (in CIDR notation) indicat-
ing it is a class C network.  For the other networks in the local
machine's    netmask    will    be    used    during    matching.
lisa            CUNETS  = ALL The user may run any command on any
host in the alias (the  class  B  network  128.138.0.0).   opera-
tor        ALL  = DUMPS, KILL, SHUTDOWN, HALT, REBOOT, PRINTING,\
                sudoedit /etc/printcap, /usr/oper/bin/  The  user
may  run commands limited to simple maintenance.  Here, those are
commands related to backups, killing processes, the printing sys-
tem, shutting down the system, and any commands in the  directory
One  command  in the Cmnd_Alias includes a sha224 digest, This is
because the directory containing the script is  writable  by  the
operator  user.  If the script is modified (resulting in a digest
mismatch)  it  will  no  longer  be  possible  to  run   it   via
joe             ALL  =  /usr/bin/su operator The user may only to
operator.   pete            HPPA  =  /usr/bin/passwd   [A-Za-z]*,
!/usr/bin/passwd *root*

%opers          ALL  = (: ADMINGRP) /usr/sbin/ Users in the group
may run commands in as themselves with any group in the (the  and
groups).   The user is allowed to change anyone's password except
for on the machines.  Because command line arguments are  matched
as  a single, concatenated string, the wildcard will match words.
This example assumes that does not take multiple  user  names  on
the  command  line.  On systems with GNU options to may be speci-
fied after the user argument.  As a result, this rule  will  also
allow:  passwd  username  --expire  which  may  not be desirable.
bob             SPARC = (OP) ALL : SGI = (OP) ALL  The  user  may
run  anything  on  the and machines as any user listed in the and
jim             +biglab = ALL The user may run any command on ma-
chines in the netgroup.  knows that is a netgroup due to the pre-
fix.    +secretaries    ALL   =    PRINTING,    /usr/bin/adduser,
/usr/bin/rmuser  Users  in  the  netgroup need to help manage the
printers as well as add and remove users, so they are allowed  to
run  those  commands on all machines.  fred            ALL = (DB)
NOPASSWD: ALL The user can run commands as any  user  in  the  or
without  giving  a password.  john            ALPHA = /usr/bin/su
[!-]*, !/usr/bin/su *root* On the machines, user may su to anyone
except but he is not allowed to specify any options to  the  com-
mand.   jen             ALL,  !SERVERS = ALL The user may run any
command on any machine except for those in  the  (primary,  mail,
www,  and ns).  jill            SERVERS = /usr/bin/, !SU, !SHELLS
For any machine in the may run any commands in the directory  ex-
cept  for  those commands belonging to the and While not specifi-
cally mentioned in the rule, the commands in the  all  reside  in
and  have  the  option  set.  steve           CSNETS = (operator)
/usr/local/op_commands/ The user may run any command in  the  di-
rectory   /usr/local/op_commands/  but  only  as  user  operator.
matt            valkyrie =  KILL  On  his  personal  workstation,
valkyrie,  needs  to  be  able  to  kill  hung processes.  WEBAD-
MIN        www = (www) ALL, (root) /usr/bin/su www  On  the  host
www,  any user in the (will, wendy, and wim), may run any command
as user www  (which  owns  the  web  pages)  or  simply  to  www.
ALL             CDROM    =    NOPASSWD:   /sbin/umount   /CDROM,\
                /sbin/mount -o nosuid\,nodev /dev/cd0a /CDROM Any
user may mount or unmount a CD-ROM on the machines in  the  CDROM
(orion,  perseus, hercules) without entering a password.  This is
a bit tedious for users to type, so it is a prime  candidate  for
encapsulating  in  a shell script.  It is generally not effective
to commands from using the operator.  A user can  trivially  cir-
cumvent  this  by copying the desired command to a different name
and then executing that.  For example: bill    ALL  =  ALL,  !SU,
!SHELLS  Doesn't  really prevent from running the commands listed
in or since he can simply copy  those  commands  to  a  different
name,  or  use  a  shell  escape from an editor or other program.
Therefore, these kind of restrictions should be considered  advi-
sory  at  best (and reinforced by policy).  In general, if a user
has sudo there is nothing to prevent them from creating their own
program that gives them a shell (or making their own  copy  of  a
shell)  regardless of any elements in the user specification.  If
the option is in use, it is not possible to reliably negate  com-
mands  where the path name includes globbing (aka wildcard) char-
acters.  This is because the C library's function cannot  resolve
relative  paths.   While  this is typically only an inconvenience
for rules that grant privileges, it can result in a security  is-
sue  for  rules that subtract or revoke privileges.  For example,
given the following file  entry:  john    ALL  =  /usr/bin/passwd
[a-zA-Z0-9]*, /usr/bin/chsh [a-zA-Z0-9]*,\
              /usr/bin/chfn  [a-zA-Z0-9]*,  !/usr/bin/* root User
can still run if is enabled by changing to and  running  instead.
Another  potential  issue  is  that when executes the command, it
must use the command or path specified by the user instead  of  a
path listed in the file.  This may lead to a time of check versus
time  of  use race condition.  Command line arguments are matched
as a single, concatenated string.  This mean a wildcard character
such as or will match across word boundaries, which may be  unex-
pected.  For example, while a sudoers entry like: %operator ALL =
/bin/cat  /var/log/messages*  will allow command like: $ sudo cat
/var/log/messages.1 It will also allow: $ sudo cat  /var/log/mes-
sages  /etc/shadow  which  is  probably not what was intended.  A
safer alternative is to use a  regular  expression  for  matching
command  line arguments.  The above example can be rewritten as a
regular  expression:  %operator  ALL  =  /bin/cat  ^/var/log/mes-
sages[^[:space:]]*$ The regular expression will only match a sin-
gle  file  with  a name that begins with and does not include any
white space in the name.  It is often better to do  command  line
processing  outside  of the file in a scripting language for any-
thing non-trivial.  Using a regular expression to match a command
name has the same security implications as using the  option:  It
is not possible to reliably negate commands when the path name is
a regular expression.  When executes the command, it must use the
command or path specified by the user instead of a path listed in
the  file.   This  may lead to a time of check versus time of use
race condition.  These issues do not apply to  rules  where  only
the  command line options are matched using a regular expression.
Once executes a program, that program is free to do  whatever  it
pleases,  including  run  other programs.  This can be a security
issue since it is not uncommon for a program to allow  shell  es-
capes, which lets a user bypass access control and logging.  Com-
mon  programs  that  permit  shell  escapes include shells (obvi-
ously), editors, paginators, mail, and terminal programs.   There
are four basic approaches to this problem: Avoid giving users ac-
cess  to  commands that allow the user to run arbitrary commands.
Many editors have a restricted mode where shell escapes are  dis-
abled,  though is a better solution to running editors via Due to
the large number of programs that offer shell escapes,  restrict-
ing users to the set of programs that do not is often unworkable.
On  most  systems, functionality can be used to transparently in-
tercept an attempt to run a new command, allow or deny  it  based
on  rules,  and log the result.  For example, this can be used to
restrict the commands run from within a privileged shell or  edi-
tor.   However,  not  all  programs operate correctly when is en-
abled.  There are two underlying mechanisms that may be  used  to
implement  mode:  and  The  setting can be used to select between
them.  The first mechanism,  overrides  the  standard  C  library
functions  that  are  used to execute a command.  It does this by
setting an environment variable (usually to the path of a dynamic
shared object, or shared library, containing custom  versions  of
the and library functions that connect back to for a policy deci-
sion.   Note,  however,  that  this  applies only to dynamically-
linked executables.  It is not possible to intercept commands for
statically-linked executables or executables that run  under  bi-
nary emulation this way.  Because most dynamic loaders ignore (or
the  equivalent)  when  running set-user-ID and set-group-ID pro-
grams, will not permit such programs to be run  in  mode  by  de-
fault.   The  mechanism is incompatible with SELinux RBAC support
(but see below).  SELinux disables by default and interferes with
file descriptor inheritance, which relies on.  The second  mecha-
nism,  is  available on Linux systems that support filtering.  It
uses and to intercept the system call instead  of  pre-loading  a
dynamic  shared  object.  Both static and dynamic executables are
supported and it is compatible with SELinux RBAC mode.  Functions
utilizing the system call, such as are not currently intercepted.
Programs that rely on themselves, such as  debuggers  and  system
call tracers such as and will be unable to function if is enabled
in  mode.   This  same restriction applies to the sudoers option.
The feature is known to work on Solaris, *BSD, Linux, macOS,  HP-
UX  11.x  and  AIX 5.3 and above.  It should be supported on most
operating systems that support the  environment  variable  or  an
equivalent.   It is not possible to intercept shell built-in com-
mands or restrict the ability to read or  write  sensitive  files
from  within  a shell.  To enable intercept mode on a per-command
basis, use the tag as documented in the User  Specification  sec-
tion  above.   Here is that example again: chuck   research = IN-
TERCEPT: ALL This allows user to run any command on  the  machine
in  intercept  mode.   Any commands run via shell escapes will be
validated and logged by If you are unsure  whether  or  not  your
system  is  capable  of supporting you can always just try it out
and check whether or not external commands run via  a  shell  are
logged  when is enabled.  There is an inherent race condition be-
tween when a command is checked against rules and when it is  ac-
tually executed.  If a user is allowed to run arbitrary commands,
they may be able to change the arguments in the program after the
policy  check  has  completed  but before the new command is exe-
cuted.  Starting with version 1.9.12, the method will verify that
the command and its arguments have not  changed  after  has  com-
pleted  but  before execution of the new program has had a chance
to run.  This is not the case with the method.  See the  descrip-
tion of the setting for more information.  There are two separate
but related ways to log additional commands.  The first is to en-
able  I/O  logging  using  the flag.  This will log the command's
output but will not create an event log entry when the additional
command is run.  The second is to enable the flag in  which  will
create  an  event  log entry every time a new command is run.  If
I/O logging is also enabled, the log entry will  include  a  time
offset  into  the  I/O  log to indicate when the command was run.
This offset can be passed to the utility to replay the I/O log at
the exact moment when the command was run.   The  flag  uses  the
same  mechanism  as  (see  above)  and  has the same limitations.
functionality can be used to prevent a program run by  from  exe-
cuting  any  other  programs.   On most systems, it uses the same
mechanism as (see above) and thus the same  caveats  apply.   The
functionality  is  capable  of blocking execution of commands run
via the and functions.  On Linux, a filter is used  to  implement
On  Solaris 10 and higher, uses Solaris privileges instead of the
environment variable.  To enable for a command, use  the  tag  as
documented in the User Specification section above.  Here is that
example    again:   aaron   shanty   =   NOEXEC:   /usr/bin/more,
/usr/bin/vi This allows user to run and with enabled.  This  will
prevent those two commands from executing other commands (such as
a  shell).  If you are unsure whether or not your system is capa-
ble of supporting you can  always  just  try  it  out  and  check
whether  shell  escapes  work when is enabled.  Restricting shell
escapes is not a panacea.  Programs running as are still  capable
of  many  potentially  hazardous  operations (such as changing or
overwriting files) that could lead to unintended privilege  esca-
lation.   In  the specific case of an editor, a safer approach is
to give the user permission to run (see below).  The  plugin  in-
cludes support which allows users to securely edit files with the
editor  of  their  choice.   As is a built-in command, it must be
specified in the file without a leading path.   However,  it  may
take command line arguments just as a normal command does.  Wild-
cards  used  in  command  line  arguments are expected to be path
names, so a forward slash will not be matched by a wildcard.  Un-
like other commands, the editor is run with  the  permissions  of
the  invoking user and with the environment unmodified.  More in-
formation may be found in the description of the  option  in  For
example,  to allow user operator to edit the file on any machine:
operator ALL = sudoedit /etc/motd The operator user then runs  as
follows: $ sudoedit /etc/motd The editor will run as the operator
user,  not on a temporary copy of After the file has been edited,
will be updated with the contents of the temporary  copy.   Users
should be granted permission to edit a file that resides in a di-
rectory  the  user  has write access to, either directly or via a
wildcard.  If the user has write access to the  directory  it  is
possible  to  replace  the legitimate file with a link to another
file, allowing the editing of arbitrary files.  To prevent  this,
starting with version 1.8.16, symbolic links will not be followed
in writable directories and will refuse to edit a file located in
a  writable  directory unless the option has been disabled or the
invoking user is Additionally, in version 1.8.15 and higher, will
refuse to open a symbolic link unless either the  option  is  en-
abled  or the command is prefixed with the tag in the file.  will
check the ownership of its time stamp directory  by  default  and
ignore the directory's contents if it is not owned by or if it is
writable by a user other than Older versions of stored time stamp
files  in this is no longer recommended as it may be possible for
a user to create the time stamp themselves on systems that  allow
unprivileged  users to change the ownership of files they create.
While the time stamp directory be cleared at reboot time, not all
systems contain a or directory.   To  avoid  potential  problems,
will  ignore  time  stamp files that date from before the machine
booted on systems where the boot time is available.  Some systems
with graphical desktop environments allow unprivileged  users  to
change  the  system  clock.  Since relies on the system clock for
time stamp validation, it may be possible on such systems  for  a
user to run for longer than by setting the clock back.  To combat
this,  uses  a  monotonic clock (which never moves backwards) for
its time stamps if the system supports it.  will not  honor  time
stamps  set  far  in the future.  Time stamps with a date greater
than current_time + 2 * will be ignored and  will  log  and  com-
plain.   If  the  option is set to the time stamp record includes
the device number of the terminal the  user  authenticated  with.
This provides per-terminal granularity but time stamp records may
still  outlive  the  user's session.  Unless the option is set to
the time stamp record also includes the session ID of the process
that last authenticated.  This prevents  processes  in  different
terminal sessions from using the same time stamp record.  On sys-
tems  where a process's start time can be queried, the start time
of the session leader is recorded in the time stamp  record.   If
no  terminal is present or the option is set to the start time of
the parent process is used instead.  In most cases this will pre-
vent a time stamp record from being reused without the  user  en-
tering  a  password when logging out and back in again.  Versions
1.8.4 and higher of  the  plugin  support  a  flexible  debugging
framework  that  can help track down what the plugin is doing in-
ternally if there is a problem.  This can be  configured  in  the
file.   The  plugin uses the same debug flag format as the front-
end: The priorities used by in order of decreasing severity, are:
and Each priority, when specified, also includes  all  priorities
higher  than  it.  For example, a priority of would include debug
messages logged at and higher.  The following subsystems are used
by the plugin: and processing matches  every  subsystem  BSM  and
Linux  audit  code  user authentication file settings environment
handling LDAP-based sudoers logging support  matching  of  users,
groups,  hosts,  and netgroups in the file network interface han-
dling network service switch handling in file parsing  permission
setting  The  equivalent  of for the plugin.  pseudo-terminal re-
lated code redblack tree  internals  SSSD-based  sudoers  utility
functions  For  example:  Debug sudoers.so /var/log/sudoers_debug
match@info,nss@info For more information, see the  manual.   Many
people  have  worked  on over the years; this version consists of
code written primarily by: See the CONTRIBUTORS.md  file  in  the
distribution (https://www.sudo.ws/about/contributors/) for an ex-
haustive  list  of people who have contributed to The file should
be edited by the utility which locks the file and checks for syn-
tax errors.  If contains syntax errors, may refuse to run,  which
is  a  serious  problem if is your only method of obtaining supe-
ruser privileges.  Recent versions of will attempt to recover af-
ter a syntax error by ignoring the rest of the line after encoun-
tering an error.  Older versions of will not run  if  contains  a
syntax  error.   When  using netgroups of machines (as opposed to
users), if you store fully qualified host name  in  the  netgroup
(as  is  usually the case), you either need to have the machine's
host name be fully qualified as returned by the  command  or  use
the  option in If you believe you have found a bug in you can ei-
ther  file   a   bug   report   in   the   sudo   bug   database,
https://bugzilla.sudo.ws/,     or     open     an     issue    at
https://github.com/sudo-project/sudo/issues.  If you would prefer
to use email, messages may be sent to  the  sudo-workers  mailing
list,  https://www.sudo.ws/mailman/listinfo/sudo-workers (public)
or <sudo@sudo.ws> (private).  Please do not report security  vul-
nerabilities  through  public  GitHub issues, Bugzilla or mailing
lists.  Instead, report them via email to  <Todd.Miller@sudo.ws>.
You  may  encrypt  your message with PGP if you would like, using
the key found at https://www.sudo.ws/dist/PGPKEYS.  Limited  free
support  is  available  via  the  sudo-users  mailing  list,  see
https://www.sudo.ws/mailman/listinfo/sudo-users to  subscribe  or
search the archives.  is provided and any express or implied war-
ranties, including, but not limited to, the implied warranties of
merchantability  and  fitness  for  a particular purpose are dis-
claimed.   See  the   LICENSE.md   file   distributed   with   or
https://www.sudo.ws/about/license/ for complete details.


